    Meeting on current situation in oil and gas sector
Event_Date: 14/4/2022
Event_Time: 17:15 
Event_Place: Novo-Ogaryovo_Moscow_Region

Good afternoon, colleagues.

We are continuing a series of industry-specific meetings, and today we will review the situation in the oil and gas sector. We will discuss its long-term development plans and approaches to resolving problems faced by the companies in this sector as a result of actions by the so-called unfriendly states.

As we have said many times, the most urgent problem here is the disruption of export logistics. I would like to ask you to describe specifically what action are you taking to adjust transport chains and overcome the rising logistics costs.

Furthermore, there are setbacks in payments for Russian energy exports. Banks from these unfriendly countries are delaying the transfer of funds.

I will remind you that our aim is to convert payments for energy resources into national currencies and to gradually depart from dollars and euros. In general, we intend to drastically increase the share of settlements in national currencies in our foreign trade system.

Important steps are already being taken in this area, and the key task is to prepare our currency market for this transition and enable customers to exchange any foreign currency for the required amount of Russian rubles.

As I have said, giving up unreliable, compromised currencies and jurisdictions is a strategic goal for the financial and economic security of our country, which is important for the preservation and strengthening of our foreign trade, and for the development of stable ties with predictable partners who are true to their word, value their reputation and are aware of the consequences of their decisions.

Here is what I would like to say in this connection. Russian energy companies are responsible players on the global market. Their reputation rests on decades of business activity and strict compliance with their obligations.

The Western countries’ attempts to push out Russian suppliers and to replace our energy resources with alternative supplies will inevitably affect the global economy as a whole. The consequences of this may be extremely painful, primarily for the initiators of the policy.

It is surprising that our so-called partners from the unfriendly countries admit that they cannot do without Russian energy resources, for example, gas. There is no reasonable alternative to Russian gas in Europe. Yes, it is possible to replace Russian gas, but not right know, which is clear to everyone. There are no uncontracted volumes of gas on the global market, and deliveries from other countries to Europe, primarily from the United States, will cost consumers several times more – I repeat, several times more – and will have a negative effect on people’s living standards and the competitiveness of the European economy.

Despite these obvious facts, European countries keep saying that they will abandon Russian gas supplies, which is further destabilising the market and increasing prices, primarily for their own citizens.

Moreover, they are ready to abandon the so-called green agenda and resume their reliance on energy with a so-called high carbon footprint, which until recently they wanted to shut down completely as out-of-date and dirty. Many political forces used environmental slogans in their election campaigns. Where is all of this now? It has been thrown on the scrapheap, and they are now acting quite differently.

Initially, serious specialists and analysts issued warnings, and they did so publicly, that an accelerated “green transition” cannot be made in practice without huge losses. This is just what happened in reality. Now they have a wonderful excuse to cover up their own miscalculations and blame everything on Russia. Importantly, these are miscalculations not only as regards energy but also in many other areas.

Of course, we must take into account the ambivalence and continuously changing policies of certain countries. That said we must be guided – now and for years ahead – by our own interests. In this context, our oil and gas industry is facing three tasks. First, we must ensure sustainable energy supplies for our domestic market. Moreover, in conditions when external markets are shrinking, it is important to increase supplies to Russian consumers. To encourage domestic demand, we must seek price reductions whenever possible.

Second. We must diversify exports. Let us assume that energy supplies to the West will continue going down in the foreseeable future. Therefore, it is important to consolidate the trend of the past few years: to redirect our exports gradually to the rapidly growing markets of the South and the East. To achieve this, we must determine the key infrastructure facilities and start their construction in the near future.

Third, we must develop deep processing of oil and gas. We have already made much progress in this area. We have implemented major projects and put modern plants into operation. Now we must provide additional support for the investment-stage projects in order to launch them into production as soon as possible.

And, of course, import substitution for oil and gas production equipment requires special attention. It is important for both operating deposits and for developing new fields, including those in the Arctic, as we discussed with several colleagues recently.

I will remind you that this Commission reviewed a detailed plan for import substitution for the development of the fuel and energy sector in late 2015. I suggest discussing whether the adopted decisions were effective and what problems and bottlenecks remain in this area.

Let us review this set of issues, adjust our work and set benchmarks for developing our fuel and energy sector.

I give the floor to Alexander Novak.

<…>

Vladimir Putin: I would like to thank everyone for their proposals and ask my colleagues from the [Presidential] Executive Office to incorporate them in the final document following our meeting today.

Above all, I would like to ask the Government to take the results of today’s discussion into account when drafting the Energy Strategy of Russia. As we agreed, its planning horizon must be extended until 2050, and the strategy must be adopted by September 15.

What priorities must be considered when drafting this document?

First, it is necessary to expand the regional gas supply programme and change approaches to its implementation so that it covers as many regions, localities and households as possible. This task is quite specific: gas – either pipelined or liquefied – should reach the consumer wherever possible.

Second, regardless of external conditions, it is necessary to ensure a sufficient supply of petroleum products on the domestic market, and at affordable prices: for car owners, transport companies and businesses, including agricultural ones. All additional decisions in this regard must also be set out.

Let me add that large-scale plans on the development of petrochemistry and natural gas conversion have already been drafted and are being implemented; it is very important to focus on this. I also mean the non-market restrictions we are facing. We need to see them through, these projects, and move forward in strengthening and building up the potential of these important sectors of the economy.

Third. Energy exports. It is necessary to speed up the implementation of infrastructure projects – on railways, pipelines and ports – which will make it possible to redirect the supplies of oil and gas from the West to promising markets in the South and the East in the next few years.

At the same time, it is important to look towards the future. We need to draw up plans with oil and gas companies for expanding the export infrastructure to countries in Africa, Latin America, and the Asia-Pacific region.

Among other things, we need to plan the construction of new oil and gas pipelines from the fields in Western and Eastern Siberia – exactly what we have just discussed at the end of our meeting; to boost the capacity for oil transshipment in Arctic and Far Eastern ports – also a very important part of Northern Sea Route development; as well as to include the Power of Siberia and Sakhalin-Khabarovsk-Vladivostok gas pipelines in the Unified Gas Supply System to distribute gas to the regions in that part of the country.

I am asking the Government to draft a long-term plan for the development of oil and gas transit infrastructure; it should be ready by June 1 of this year. Please do not delay this.

I am asking the Government to include businesses and the Institute for Initiatives in Oil and Gas Technologies – we also spoke about this – in planning the transition from foreign standard and certification systems in the gas and petrochemical industry to domestic systems. This must be done without delay – before the end of this year.

Next. To stimulate import substitution in the oil and gas and petrochemical industries, we need to clearly understand our companies’ needs and interests. In this regard, I consider it expedient to work out options for consolidating demand and resources in this field, to put together a kind of umbrella package of orders for the design and manufacturing of the types of products, machinery and equipment that all our energy companies need. These are the objectives that we must direct our efforts and resources towards first.

We also spoke about bank clearing and discussed this working group Elvira Nabiullina proposed at one of our meetings. We will establish this in the near future and continue this work. I would like to thank all the participants in today's meeting and discussion. I think it was quite substantive and specific and, I am sure, will benefit the industry.

Thank you very much. All the best, everyone. Thank you.



////



Meeting on Arctic zone development
Event_Date: 13/4/2022
Event_Time: 14:35
Event_Place: Novo-Ogaryovo_Moscow_Region

Good afternoon, colleagues.

Today, we will discuss the development of the Arctic zone of Russia.

We have always prioritised efforts to accomplish social, economic and infrastructure tasks in this highly important region and to implement large-scale investment projects there. This remains a priority. Hundreds of thousands of Russian citizens live and work in Arctic territories, and virtually all aspects of this country’s national security, including the environmental, natural resources, military-political and technological dimensions, are concentrated here.

I want to note right away that, considering all kinds of external restrictions and sanctions pressure, we need to focus on all projects and plans linked with the Arctic. We must not shelve or delay them; on the contrary, we must expedite our work on current and long-term tasks to the greatest possible extent, in response to attempts to hamper our development.

Above all, this concerns the social sphere. We should always focus on matters that are most sensitive for people. Under the extreme conditions of the Arctic, people’s health and security are at stake, as well as the survival of entire towns and settlements.

As you may know, the actions by the unfriendly countries have disrupted a number of transport and logistical chains. Certain foreign companies are not meeting their contractual obligations in full or not at all. There is no doubt that in the existing situation this is creating certain difficulties for us. But we have all the resources and every opportunity to enable us to find alternative solutions in no time, and to strengthen our independence from external factors to an even greater extent in the long term.

This is an extremely important task.

To this end, all responsible agencies employed in the Arctic should competently and quickly reorganise their operations, primarily in order to ensure that residents of Arctic territories, rotation workers, businesses and social institutions in the region obtain an uninterrupted supply of food, medicines, fuel, building materials, and equipment. As a reminder, the start of the northern supply haul is close at hand.

The haul should proceed in a well-managed and organised manner, in accordance with the schedule and without setbacks. The Arctic should be supplied with all the necessary goods and services – and in full. This is of fundamental importance in order to guarantee price stability in populated Arctic localities. A list of ships to be employed in the haul and their sailing plan should be compiled as soon as possible. Their priority departure from ports should be ensured as should a more active use of air transport.

I suggest we think of appointing a single operator in the area of maritime delivery of cargoes under the northern supply programme, one involving icebreaker support. Generally, we should clearly identify a northern supply coordinator in the form of a relevant agency and, of course, invest it with all powers and responsibilities. Please submit concrete proposals for this later today.

Let me add the following. I urge the Government and the heads of the Arctic regions to take special responsibility for the smooth construction or renovation of social facilities – kindergartens, schools, hospitals, and rural medical and obstetric stations. Everything envisaged by our programmes and national projects should be implemented.

Another goal towards which we must work proactively is the implementation of priority investment projects. This will determine the further development of the Arctic regions and the well-being of their residents, the preservation of jobs and the creation of new jobs, as well as the fulfilment of Russia’s commitments to reliable business partners.

It is obvious that today many projects should be adjusted, that they need additional support and flexible, out-of-the-box solutions when it comes to funding, technologies and the supply of materials, construction equipment and component parts.

Today I would like to hear your reports on plans for the failsafe adoption of pivotal comprehensive initiatives, which should be done at a normal working pace to ensure the further development of business activity in the Arctic, including support for small and medium-sized businesses.

I would like to emphasise once again that several Western countries’ rejection of normal cooperation, including at least part of Russian energy resources, has hit back at millions of Europeans, has led to a real energy crisis and, incidentally, is affecting the United States. Prices are growing everywhere, and the inflation rate is soaring, which is a completely unprecedented situation for these countries. Of course, we are facing problems as well, but we also have alternatives, new options and new windows of opportunity.

As for Russian oil, gas and coal, we can increase their consumption on the domestic market, stimulate the value-added conversion of raw materials and also boost energy deliveries to the parts of the world that really need them. To achieve this goal, we will make use of all the available opportunities, including the development of transport corridors like the Northern Latitudinal Railway.

The active construction phase of this railway project is scheduled to begin as early as this year. I would like to draw the attention of the Government, RZD, Gazprom and other companies that are involved in this project to the fact that this is a direct instruction, and that is how you must regard it. We have been working on the Northern Latitudinal Railway project for a long time. It will help us ease the burden on the BAM and Trans-Siberian railways, which is a matter of fundamental importance in light of redirecting our basic exports to the east.

Yesterday, I spoke with the Amur Region Governor where trains come and go every five minutes in some places. By the way, he asked us to help with viaduct construction. We must do this, no matter what, because it is necessary to create normal living conditions in these areas. Well, this is a different subject, and we will discuss it later.

Today, I suggest that we discuss a number of other matters in detail.

The development of the Northern Sea Route is the first topic. It is necessary to create a modern port and search-and-rescue infrastructure there. We also need to develop satellite-based monitoring systems and communications networks. This also includes the implementation of our ambitious plans, in the good sense of this term, to expand icebreaker and merchant marine fleets and to build Arctic-class gas carriers.

I would like the Head of the Rosatom State Corporation to report on projects to build and design new icebreakers, as well as on the state measures that are essential in order to fully accomplish all the tasks that have been set here on time.

The second topic is to do with equipment for Arctic ports and terminals, vessels, navigation systems, as well as equipment for regional enterprises. Today, I am looking forward to hearing proposals on import substitution and the localisation of the relevant equipment manufacturing facilities in Russia.

The third area of importance is ecology and the environment. We closely link all Arctic programmes and projects with efforts to preserve biodiversity and Arctic ecosystems, as well as long-term work to address climate agenda tasks.

Thus, we need to continue implementing projects to totally eliminate accumulated damage. This also concerns scientific research programmes, primarily those aiming to facilitate a stable balance between economic development and the conservation of Arctic nature. As you know, the local ecosystem is very fragile.

Permafrost monitoring projects are the foundation for maintaining such stability. Melting permafrost layers can have an impact on Arctic ecosystems and infrastructure facilities, as well as those in adjacent territories. We have already issued an instruction to create and finance the relevant monitoring system. Today, I will ask you to report on its implementation.

I would like to emphasise that scientific data and timely, well-grounded forecasts will allow us to make the best managerial decisions, including those on developing international cooperation in the Arctic.

The Severny Polyus (North Pole) ice-resistant vessel is set to become a platform for international scientific cooperation. Working in the format of an operating drifting laboratory – and I think they plan to establish 16 laboratories there – it will provide for the broadest range of studies – from bottom deposits to the upper layers of the atmosphere. This vessel is in a league of its own, and the international scientific community is certainly interested in its launch and start of work. It is necessary to complete all tests without red tape and send this vessel on its first expedition in autumn as we planned.

I would like to emphasise that Russia is open for cooperation with all interested partners under current and future programmes and projects in the Arctic. This is confirmed by the special economic terms in place here, as well as all sorts of preferences for Russian and foreign businesses.

I believe in the current conditions we should get extra-regional states and associations more involved in cooperation in the Arctic – there will be enough work for everyone. We will offer cooperation to all those who, like Russia, are interested in the sustainable development of this unique region. We view the Arctic as a territory of dialogue, stability and constructive cooperation rather than a zone of geopolitical intrigue.

Let us get down to business.

I am giving the floor to Deputy Prime Minister and Chairman of the State Commission for Arctic Development Yury Trutnev. Mr Trutnev, please.

Deputy Prime Minister – Presidential Envoy to the Far Eastern Federal District, Chairman of the State Commission for Arctic Development Yury Trutnev: Mr President, colleagues,

Three years ago, in accordance with the President’s decision, the Ministry for the Development of the Russian Far East was tasked with working on Arctic development. What has been done since then?

First of all, a legislative framework was created to increase the investment appeal of the Russian Arctic. The Foundations of Russia’s State Policy in the Arctic and the Strategy for Developing the Russian Arctic Zone and Ensuring National Security until 2035 were developed and adopted. Six federal laws and 40 regulatory acts were approved.

Using the experience gained in the Far East, we developed the Arctic system of preferences differentiated by four types of economic activity. As a result, the growth of new projects in the Arctic zone is 20–25 percent higher than in the Far East. Today, more than 460 projects are being implemented in the Arctic with state support. Total contract investment exceeds 1.3 trillion rubles. As a result of their implementation, 30,000 jobs will be created.

Most projects are implemented in sparsely populated areas and require support for building infrastructure. So, for the development of the Baimskaya ore zone, it is necessary to build a marine terminal and an automobile road. Providing the project with electricity will require the construction of a floating nuclear power plant. At the same time, the launch of this project will help double Chukotka's budget.

Segezha West will be the first project to create a pulp and paper mill in 40 years. As part of the Arctic LNG 2 project, a unique centre of large-tonnage offshore facilities is being created. The development of the Syradasaisky coking coal deposit will ensure the transportation of up to seven million tonnes of coal along the Northern Sea Route by 2026.

Mr President,

I am here to report to you that the actions undertaken by unfriendly countries have led to difficulties in implementing ongoing projects and have increased the cost of borrowing. Please consider the proposals on subsidising interest rates for the above projects. The required financing for 2022 amounts to 5.9 billion rubles.

Developing the Northern Sea Route is a systemically critical prerequisite for implementing the Arctic zone projects. The Northern Sea Route is instrumental in importing the necessary construction materials, transporting raw materials and finished products and, in fact, ties the Russian North together.

Our strategic goal is to create a new global transport corridor based on the Northern Sea Route. Four companies, NOVATEK, Gazpromneft, Rosneft and Severnaya Zvezda will account for the bulk of cargo shipment along the Northern Sea Route until 2024. If these companies manage to fulfill their plans, the volume of cargo transported along the NSR will have exceeded 200 million tonnes by 2030. The heads of the companies are here and will report on the implementation of the project separately.

Much needs to be done along the entire NSR in order to ensure safe and reliable cargo shipment if we want to increase cargo traffic. This work is underway. Four nuclear-powered icebreakers, including the peerless Leader icebreaker, are under construction at Russian shipyards. Six more icebreakers will be built by 2030. Four of them will be built with extra-budgetary funding.

Starting from 2025, Rosatom will launch a regular transport line, which will increase international transit to 30 million tonnes by 2030. Regarding the expansion of port infrastructure, four terminals are being built on the Northern Sea Route with a total investment of over 300 billion rubles to 2030.

Mr President, thank you for your decision regarding the Northern Latitudinal Railway which is crucial for the development of the Northern Sea Route.

Upgrading the emergency rescue infrastructure and expanding the Emergencies Ministry operated maritime and aviation emergency rescue centre network is of paramount importance. Expanding the space group in order to create a stable communications, meteorology and ice radar system is a separate task.

Mr President, you said that extending target dates was unacceptable, so please support the proposal to align the timeframe for making decisions on financing the construction of additional icebreakers and the satellite constellation infrastructure with the schedules that are required to see these investment projects to successful completion.

The Arctic projects will add more than 30 trillion rubles to the GDP by 2035, and tax revenue will reach 13 trillion. The companies will match every ruble from the budget with 15 rubles of their own funds. Budget investments usually pay off in four years.

Expanding domestic transport is critical. In conjunction with Rosatom, the Ministry for the Development of the Russian Far East and the Arctic will open a regular coastal service between St Petersburg and Vladivostok in August operated by a Sevmorput lighter carrier which will cut the cost of transporting the cargo needed for investment projects, and will also help ensure northern delivery.

A few words about the northern shipments that provide residents of 25 northern Russian regions with food, essential supplies, medicines, and building materials. The volume of cargo shipping along the Northern Sea Route under northern delivery alone is over 3 million tonnes annually.

Transport costs significantly impact the final price of essential supplies, medicines, and food, and thus, the standard of living of people in the Arctic. Since northern delivery is paid for with lending resources, a higher cost can trigger a spike in prices of food, medicines, and building materials.

Mr President, if you decide to support us, we are ready to promptly put together proposals for subsidising the interest rate for northern shipping.

There is still much to do in the North. Creating comfortable living conditions is among our priorities. A major project for modernising communal flat infrastructure and renovating the housing stock will be carried out in Norilsk. Norilsk Nickel will cover the bulk of spending in the amount of 120 billion rubles.

Mr President,

In accordance with your instructions for developing the Far East, funds are annually allocated to eliminate the backlog of social infrastructure projects. As part of this programme, over the last four years in the Far East we have built and repaired 1,500 social facilities, including schools, hospitals, kindergartens, and sports grounds. I consider it important to draft the same programme for developing the Russian Arctic zone.

Since August 2021, the Far Eastern Hectare programme has also been implemented in the Arctic. Over the first six months, we have received almost 8,000 applications. The greatest demand is for hectares in the Murmansk Region and the Republic of Karelia.

Under the Children of the Arctic project, 100 percent of the cost of recreation for children living in the Arctic zone will be covered by the federal budget.

Nineteen indigenous peoples of the North live in the Russian Arctic zone. The preservation of their customs, traditions and way of life is one of the foundations of our state’s policy. The state budget has necessary funds for this work.

Another important area of work in the Arctic is the development of science and technology. For this purpose, two scientific and educational centres are being created in the Arctic zone: in the Arkhangelsk Region and the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia). The construction of an ice-resistant mobile platform for oceanological, biological and environmental studies is nearing completion.

A year-round Arctic research station, Snezhinka, using advanced technologies in the field of clean energy production and life support systems will be built in Yamal.

Work has begun on environmental monitoring and addressing the damage that has accumulated over time.

Mr President, colleagues,

On March 1, 2021, Russia became the chair of the Arctic Council. More than 8,000 people representing 15 countries have already taken part in this work in such areas as economic development, investment, exploration of the Arctic Ocean shelf, and preservation of the traditional way of life, customs and languages of the indigenous peoples of the North.

Sustainable development of the region and joint efforts to counter climate change are the main topic of Russia’s chairmanship. No country in the world can do this work alone; but that is especially true without Russia, which accounts for 58 percent of the Arctic coast. I am sure that our neighbours in the Arctic region will realise their responsibility and resume joint work.

Mr President,

In conclusion, I would like to present the results we should achieve by 2030 by implementing the state programme for the socioeconomic development of the Arctic and the strategy for the development of the Arctic region and indicators of national projects.

The number of projects implemented with state support will reach at least 1,300, actual private investments made total at least 730 billion roubles, and there are planned investments under contracts worth almost five trillion. At least 110,000 jobs will be created. The average salary in the Arctic zone will increase to 159,000 roubles.

Mr President, thank you for your attention and constant support for our work to develop the Arctic and the Far East.

Vladimir Putin: Thank you.

<…>

Vladimir Putin: Colleagues,

I would like to summarise our discussion and outline the main objectives and instructions.

First of all, I believe it is necessary to approve the masterplan for the development of the Northern Sea Route for the period until 2035, to ensure reliable and safe cargo shipment on this essential shipping artery, the Northern Sea Route.

I would like the Government to plan for the following objectives.

First, to clearly identify the Northern Sea Route cargo traffic for the long-term perspective by specifying investment projects, shipping companies’ obligations in terms of volume – as this determines our infrastructure goals – as well as the size and composition of the icebreaker fleet. All of our colleagues have just been talking about this. It goes beyond icebreakers though. I agree with Rosatom management when they say that we should consider the types of vessels that will operate at the icebreakers’ tails. These 132 vessels that I mentioned must also be considered now. Our fleet upgrade plan also depends on these factors and the volume of shipments.

We need to clearly determine the deadlines and volumes of icebreaker and Arctic-class vessel supplies. We also need to consider the scope of associated hardware required for construction. Considering this, we need to plan modernisation and expansion of production capacities for our shipbuilding facilities. It is also necessary for us to take action with respect to maintenance, in line with the report of the Arkhangelsk Region Governor.

Second, the master plan for the development of the Northern Sea Route must include the construction and maintenance of a rescue fleet and the Emergencies Ministry’s comprehensive emergency and rescue centres. We have hardly spoken about this today but it is a very important task. I know that we mentioned a helicopter group and so on but it is not sufficient and it is a different matter. Above all, we need to consider such upgrades where essential and large-scale infrastructure and investment projects are involved.

Third, it is necessary to identify the level and sources of funding for all the measures included in the masterplan. This funding must be very specific and broken down by year.

Furthermore, as we have said, complete and timely maritime delivery of goods to the north is a task of special importance. I would like to ask you to draft a special federal law on northern delivery. It should reflect all aspects of the issue, starting from a list of goods and delivery methods to the planning, implementation and control of these measures. At the same time, it is necessary to upgrade the existing and establish new transport corridors involving the Northern Sea Route and adjacent waters.

As for implementing investment projects in the Arctic, I would like you to make active use of state support mechanisms, including the so-called Project Finance Factory. I would also ask you to review the issue of extending the benefits enjoyed by the residents of the Russian Arctic to the projects of companies that are already operating there. Obviously, there are many issues here, but these measures will allow these companies to build up their capacities and expand production. I would like to ask you to study the issue of granting these benefits.

In conclusion, I would like to tell you about the proposal related to the development of the housing and social infrastructure of the closed administrative territorial units (CATU) of the Arctic zone, notably, military settlements and bases where our military personnel live with their families and children.

I would like to ask the Government and the Defence Minister to monitor this issue and to ensure, before 2024, comprehensive modernisation of the infrastructure, energy, housing and social facilities in the Murmansk Region’s CATU – the Northern Fleet’s main base. You should continue this work in all other Arctic areas. It is necessary to focus on creating new jobs in addition to building and upgrading kindergartens, schools, medical, cultural and entertainment facilities. This very important task directly affects the wellbeing of the families of our military personnel.

Of course, in working on the draft instructions that we already have, you should pay attention to the proposals made during our current meeting which were not reflected in this document before.

Many thanks to all of you.



////



Meeting with President of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko
Event_Date: 12/4/2022
Event_Time: 15:20
Event_Place: Amur_Region


Mr Lukashenko,

Thank you very much for coming here, to the Russian Far East, to a project that is still under construction but is already working, our new Vostochny Cosmodrome. You have seen the scale of the project.

It is symbolic that we are meeting here on April 12, Cosmonautics Day, because very many things in the life of the former Soviet Union, in our lives and in the life of our generations, are associated with that day, April 12, 1961. It was a day of triumph for the Soviet Union, the day of the first man in space, the first manned flight. It is pleasant that we are talking about continuing our cooperation today, under new conditions, based on the achievements reached in the previous decades and the latest best practices.

I am referring to the creation of a new satellite for high-resolution remote sensing of the Earth and our future joint project on plasma engine, which we can make use of; it is a highly promising area. Of course, there is also the construction of the cosmodrome – we need good construction professionals, with high competencies and good technologies. Thanks to your efforts, Belarus has not only preserved all these resources but is actively developing them, and we can use them to address our common goals, which will undoubtedly boost the development of our economies and high technologies in our countries.

Of course, I would like to use this occasion, our meeting today, to talk about our continued cooperation in the spheres we have outlined for the further development of the Union State. There is still much to do.

Despite the so-called external pressure, our economic relations are growing successfully. Our trade has reached nearly US$40 billion or more precisely US$38 billion, which is a very good indicator. Belarus is one of Russia’s leading trade partners.

Moreover, the current circumstances and external pressure offer us new opportunities to make use of all our potential capabilities to support each other and to provide unconditional support to our development, including in such high-tech spheres as space exploration.

This is in addition to [our cooperation in] agriculture and industry. We have done a great deal over the past years to boost our cooperation. Essentially, we have opened up our market to Belarusian goods. I believe that it is a very good pillar of cooperation on both sides.

I would also like to mention our cooperation in energy, including nuclear energy (we are completing a major project in Belarus) and hydrocarbons, that is, oil and gas. There are issues we need to consider and discuss, including industry, and not only the production of agricultural equipment but also many other branches, mechanical engineering, namely heavy machine building.

I am delighted to see you. Welcome.



////



Joint news conference with President of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko
Event_Date: 12/4/2022
Event_Time: 16:10
Event_Place: Amur_Region

Mr Lukashenko, friends,

I consider it important and symbolic that the talks with the President of Belarus today, on Cosmonautics Day, took place here, at Vostochny Cosmodrome.

Our nations are proud that the first manned flight to space, by Yury Gagarin, 61 years ago ushered in a new era of space exploration.

President Lukashenko and I visited the Cosmodrome’s key facilities on this memorable day – the command centre and the launching pad for the Angara launch vehicles. We talked to Cosmodrome employees and met with the pilot-cosmonauts who received Russia’s high state decorations just recently, a few hours ago.

Everything that we saw during our visit to Vostochny Cosmodrome, all the successes in space exploration over the past few years show that our country maintains its leadership in cosmonautics. It is obviously a leader in this area. Russia’s space industry is dynamically developing with reliance on the powerful scientific and technical potential created over the past decades.

Importantly, together with our Belarusian friends, we have managed to preserve and enhance our close cooperation in space research. Our countries are carrying out joint programmes and we will continue doing all we can to promote cooperation in this vital area.

I would like to note that on April 1, on the eve of the Day of Unity between the peoples of Russia and Belarus, Mr Lukashenko, acting as the Chairman of the Union State Supreme State Council awarded prizes in science and technology to teams of Russian and Belarusian scientists for joint space developments.

We agreed to continue encouraging this cooperation, in particular, to intensify the work on developing a space system for the remote sensing of the Earth. These are devices for electro-optical high-detail video surveillance, which will become a key element in the EAEU-developed integrated system for producing space and geo-information products.

One more promising move is to involve Belarusian specialists in building space infrastructure on Russian territory, including this Cosmodrome. A law is about to be adopted to allow citizens and companies from Belarus to work on the territory of the Tsiolkovsky closed administrative-territorial formation of the Amur Region, where we are now.

We also discussed an orbital mission with a Belarusian cosmonaut. This could take place as early as next year.

Naturally, during the talks we reviewed in detail many other current bilateral issues. As closest allies, we are building relations on the immutable principles of mutual respect and support and traditions of friendship and neighbourliness which are upheld by our common history, spiritual and cultural values and close ties of kinship.

Belarus is our leading trade and economic partner in the CIS and ranks fourth for us globally. In 2021, our trade grew by more than one third – as we have just discussed – reaching US$40 billion. I am convinced that in the current situation, when the Western countries have unleashed a complete sanctions war against Russia and Belarus, it is important to deepen our integration within the Union State, and we agree with Mr President on this issue.

We will continue to oppose any attempt to impede the development of our countries or to isolate them artificially from the global economy. I believe this is pointless; Russia and Belarus have always been closely linked economically. As I said, we are tied in many ways, including industrial cooperation, and such attempts will never succeed against us. I am confident that we will become even stronger because we will develop our own competences and, importantly, we will not isolate ourselves.

Our governments and relevant departments have organised work on import substitution and the uninterrupted functioning of financial and commodity markets. The Union State has the following priorities: to unify and harmonise trade regulations, remove administrative and technical barriers, and create equal opportunities for Russian and Belarusian citizens and companies. These are the goals of the 28 sectoral programmes endorsed by the Supreme State Council on November 4, 2021. The President of Belarus noted today that our countries have already carried out over 30 percent of what we had planned by the end of 2023.

Thus, we determined approaches to the formation of a uniform monetary policy, currency regulations and integration of national payment systems with banking. We signed a contract on harmonising our customs legislation. We are working to launch an interstate centre on financial risk management. We are creating an integrated system for administering indirect taxes. We met halfway our Belarusian friends and granted them comfortable terms for servicing Russian loans. We hope this will help strengthen the entire financial sector of the Union State.

In energy, we finalised a draft international contract to create an integrated electricity market. Russia keeps its lowest prices on oil and gas for domestic consumption in Belarus. Payments for them have been switched to Russian rubles. This makes it possible to minimise the negative influence of the external environment on the position of Belarusian citizens and industrial companies.

The joint construction of a Belarusian nuclear power plant is nearing completion. Its second power unit will be put into operation by the end of this year.

In transport, we launched an integrated product tracking system. We are gradually integrating databases of government monitoring bodies in transport supervision. We intend to accelerate the development of new transport routes in the south and the east to guarantee delivery of our products abroad.

Of course, we discussed issues related to creating a common defence space and ensuring the security of the Union State. We analysed measures to defend our western borders, the course of military-technical cooperation and specified the plans for joint exercises. Mr Lukashenko was informed in detail about the progress of the special military operation in Donbass and Ukraine and the progress of talks.

Taking this opportunity, I would like to express my gratitude to our Belarusian colleagues for the efficient organisation of several negotiating rounds on their territory. A direct dialogue with the Ukrainian side was possible largely due to President of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko’s personal efforts. We believe the Belarusian platform is quite suitable for further meetings.

Overall, Mr Lukashenko and I have covered almost all areas of our interaction today.

The President of Belarus has yet to visit Vladivostok. The President plans to see the cultural and educational centre that is being built with the participation of Belarusian specialists, as well as to become more familiar with the achievements of the Far Eastern Federal District in the socioeconomic and other spheres.

Mr President, I am sure this part of your visit will be productive and will help expand and strengthen our interaction.

Thank you for your attention.

President of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko: Mr Putin, ladies and gentlemen,

First of all, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the President of Russia for the warm welcome on this land. This trip to this Far Eastern land is extremely important to us. This is a stunning and extraordinary land.

Frankly, I have long wanted to come here. For me, it was a kind of a romantic adventure. The fact that we had a chance to see the implementation of a project such as Vostochny Cosmodrome on Cosmonautics Day made the general impression received by our entire delegation even stronger. This is a world-class project, as they often refer to it. No, it is above world level. No one else in the world has ever carried out such a project.

Space exploration is our shared goal. During Soviet times, Belarusians made a significant contribution to the development of cosmonautics.

In our times, with the help of fraternal Russia, we have managed not only to revive the old competencies, but also to develop many new ones. As a result, Belarus has joined the ranks of space powers. In fact, we have created a new branch of the economy, space economics, and we are proud of these successes. Most importantly, we see prospects for the future which include developing a system for remote sensing of the Earth – a decision concerning this programme was made today, satellite communications and many other exciting areas of cooperation in this sphere.

The time has probably come to open the door to space for new Belarusian cosmonauts. I am grateful to the President for supporting this initiative and, moreover, for making a decision, in conjunction with the head of Roscosmos, to finance the training and the launching of our cosmonaut into space.

Of course, as Mr President said, we also had an in-depth discussion on other current issues on the bilateral agenda, on political, diplomatic, economic and, of course, military and defence matters.

There have never been such dangerous and complicated periods in the modern history of our relations with the West. I pointed this out when we discussed the issue that everyone is talking about today; I pointed this out to Mr President, and I said this for a reason, that if Russia had taken even a bit longer to start its military operation, a blow they believed to be crushing would have been delivered at the adjacent regions. We can clearly see today that this was more than possible.

Therefore, those who say that it was the wrong move or that it was made in the wrong place and at the wrong time should weigh it against the potential consequences of what would have happened had this move been made a month or even two weeks later. There is nothing more to add.

It is like the story in Bucha; we discussed that policy. There is a lot of commotion, but they just needed to adopt a new package of sanctions, as we know very well. We discussed their special operation today, the psychological operation carried out by the British. If you want to know the addresses, the secret meeting places, the licence plate numbers, the brands of vehicles they used in Bucha, and how they did it, the FSB of Russia can provide this information. If not, we can help. We exposed that ugly, disgusting position of the West together with our Russian friends, in full and from the beginning to the end.

Back then, we decided that the cold war was over, that the page had been turned and we would live in a new, civilised and fair world based on mutual understanding and the rule of international law. This is what we thought, but the West thought differently. They did not destroy us back then, and so they have decided to do it now. We are in an extremely dangerous situation; it is a showdown, and it did not appear out of thin air. Washington and Brussels have been deliberately moving towards this for years. It is perfectly clear now that, regrettably, the clash could not be avoided. Moreover, as I said before, it was only a matter of time and place. I would like to stress again that if we had waited a little longer, the consequences would have been extremely severe.

The governments of Belarus and Russia have prepared comprehensive packages of measures to overcome, among other things, the sanctions pressure, to support the economies, to expand cooperation and, most importantly, import substitution, to reconfigure supply chains and to switch to a new mechanism for foreign trade cooperation.

As we are responding to current challenges today, we must already be looking to tomorrow, which is what is happening here, and putting in place a ground-breaking economic development strategy for building the Union State for the long term.

They say the world will never be the same, which is true. For those who would very much like to return, as they say, to their comfort zone, we can say it straight: forget about it. The modern world is all about fierce struggle and civilisational clashes. Incidentally, the West has never had any illusions in this regard. By the way, there was once a major figure in Europe who, in the 1930s and 1940s, also tried to establish a new order. We are all well aware of how it all ended.

So, I think it is time for Washington to return to the recent past when our fathers, grandfathers and great-grandfathers stood up to the enemy and eventually won. We will also win, as has happened many times in our common thousand-year history.

Thank you.



////



Ceremony for presenting state decorations
Event_Date: 12/4/2022
Event_Time: 12:20
Event_Place: Amur_Region

Good afternoon, friends, Mr Lukashenko.

More than 60 years ago, on April 12, 1961, Soviet officer Yury Gagarin performed the first space flight in history. We are marking Cosmonautics Day to commemorate his feat and this landmark achievement.

Each of us is experiencing special feelings today, including genuine pride for the generations that accomplished a grandiose technological breakthrough, and faith in the future, in our might and progressive development and confidence that we will certainly achieve all our goals. I am confident that this will be so.

I warmly congratulate all our citizens, the citizens of Russia and the citizens of Belarus, all our compatriots, cosmonauts and the staff of Vostochny Cosmodrome, active and retired workers of the rocket and space sector.

I would like to separately address and say a few warm words to service personnel of the Russian Aerospace Forces.

Space, air force, space force are closely interlinked. We know that our officers are currently involved in the special military operation in Donbass, Ukraine, and that they are assisting the people’s republics of Donbass. They are acting bravely, skilfully, effectively and with good results, as they use the most advanced types of weapons with unique and unprecedented specifications.

The discoveries and inventions of humankind’s greatest thinkers, our compatriots Tsiolkovsky, Korolev, Glushko, Chelomei and other outstanding Russian scientists and designers, the unparalleled work of teams from all over the Soviet Union, our engineers and workers are the main foundation of our achievements in addressing defensive tasks and developing civilian space technologies.

They worked for the country in the full sense of the word, they fought for their Fatherland at plants, factories and design bureaux, and they won the toughest race for leadership in outer space. They developed the first artificial space satellite, the first manned spacecraft and the first space station, and they also launched automatic probes to study the Moon and Mars.

It was a domestically built spacecraft that made the first ever landing on the incandescent surface of Venus. No other nation in the world has been able to develop such a technological solution to this day, or for that matter many other rocket and space technologies.

The generation of national rocket and space programme creators has left us not only immense technological achievements but also values that we look up to, even today, and examples of comradeship, audacity – in the finest sense of the word – willpower and courage, which unite and inspire us to this day. Our ancestors’ message to us is their urge to move forward, despite all challenges or outside attempts to hamper our advance.

We will certainly implement – consistently and in a persistent manner – all the plans we have mapped out. We will continue developing a new-generation transport spacecraft and space nuclear energy technologies, where undoubtedly, we have made a very good headstart and possess absolutely obvious advantages. We will resume the moon-exploration programme: I am referring to the [planned] launch of an autonomous craft, the Luna 25 robotised space system, from Vostochny Cosmodrome.

I would like to stress that we must successfully respond to space exploration challenges so as to be able to more effectively pursue national development goals here, on planet Earth, strengthen our security and technological sovereignty, and create advanced R&D in robotics, microelectronics, the environment, medicine, new energy, as well as navigation and communications.

For example, it is necessary to tap the potential of space information technologies at a new level to ensure further introduction of digital services into all sectors of the economy, state administration, education, healthcare, and everyday life. For this purpose, we intend to expand considerably the quantitative and qualitative potential of Russia’s satellite fleet under the Sfera programme.

As for Earth remote sensing, we have started a major project to manufacture and launch specialised spacecraft. To do this, we have pooled the scientific and industrial potential of Russia and the leading Belarusian companies, which have been renowned since Soviet times for their skills in producing precision equipment and the most complex optoelectronic and radio engineering systems.

Jointly creating an infrastructure that can guarantee the Union State independent access to space will be yet another important, signature dimension of our collaboration.

Very soon, Belarusian workers and specialists, companies and enterprises, will be able to contribute to developing the city of Tsiolkovsky and Vostochny Cosmodrome. The State Duma has already approved legislative amendments to this effect, and once the Federation Council reviews them, which will also happen quite soon, I will immediately sign them into law.

There is another decision I wanted to mention specifically. I am asking Roscosmos to arrange the necessary training and organise a flight of a Belarusian national into space on a Russian spacecraft. We discussed this with Mr Lukashenko a long time ago. I am certain that this will be yet another major milestone in our cooperation in space exploration.

Friends,

It would not be an exaggeration to say that being a cosmonaut is a heroic profession, since every spaceflight is always about accomplishing a feat, of being a pioneer, penetrating the unknown and reaching the limits of human capabilities, while performing the most challenging research and engineering tasks. Of course, people who demonstrate personal courage, strong spirit, boldness, a high level of competence and successfully deliver on a mission that matters so much for our country deserve the highest decorations.

It is a pleasure for me to present these decorations to our cosmonauts, especially since we have been waiting for so long to hold this ceremony.

Sergei Prokopyev is hereby awarded the Hero of the Russian Federation title and the honorary title Pilot-Cosmonaut of the Russian Federation. During his first space expedition, he carried out two spacewalks, including an extremely challenging inspection of the spacecraft’s outer covering, writing a page into the history of world cosmonautics. As far as I know, there were no proper fastening devices. How this was done is of course a separate story.

Alexander Skvortsov and Oleg Skripochka carried out three long orbital missions each. Through the honest and responsible service to their Motherland they made a substantial contribution to developing manned spaceflight programmes and Russia’s role in them, enhanced our country’s standing. For that, they receive the Order for Services to the Fatherland, III degree.

Once again, I would like to offer you my greetings on this holiday, friends, and congratulate our cosmonauts on receiving these high decorations.

Let us move on with the ceremony.



////



Meeting on developing agriculture and fisheries
Event_Date: 5/4/2022
Event_Time: 17:35
Event_Place: Novo-Ogaryovo_Moscow_Region

Colleagues, good afternoon.

I see that all the participants are here.

Today, we continue the series of meetings on key sectors of the economy to discuss measures designed to ensure the steady operation of our businesses and reliable domestic supplies both in the current situation and in the long term.

At the top of the agenda today is food production and the processing industry. We will consider all the factors, including the area of cultivated land, land reclamation, and the availability of fertilisers, seeds, agricultural machinery and equipment for the food industry. In a word, we will discuss everything that influences the quantity and quality of goods on the shelves of Russian shops, and consequently, to a certain extent, the price of foods.

As you know, the situation on the global food market has become noticeably more challenging over the past two years. I meant it when I said two years. The mistakes the developed countries have made in their economic, energy and food policies have led to a sharp rise in food prices around the world even two years ago.

The situation has, if anything, worsened in recent weeks. With the minimal food supplies available in the world, new sanctions are being introduced; companies’ operation and the logistics of supplying fertilisers from Russia and Belarus are blocked; and their own fertiliser production in the West is shrinking due to high natural gas prices, which is also the result of their actions – our Western partners’ actions.

Again, the situation on the energy market is deteriorating as a result of non-market, crude measures, including administrative pressure on our Gazprom in some European countries. We are witnessing yet another attempt by our partners to shift the blame for their own blunders in the economic and energy sectors onto Russia, and to resolve the ensuing problems again at our expense. Moreover, we are already hearing statements from officials about the possible nationalisation of some of our assets. Well, that can take us all any length. Please remember that this is a double-edged weapon.

Back to the discussion at hand, I would say that in this situation, a shortage of fertilisers on the global market is inevitable. Not all countries will be able to purchase the amount of fertilisers they need for the current season, which means that crop yields will also decrease.

At the same time, it is important to note that developed economies will try to redirect food flows to their advantage using the mechanism of money emission. But this will inevitably exacerbate food shortages in the poorest regions of the world, will spur new waves of migration, and generally will drive global food prices even higher.

I repeat, this scenario is more than realistic, and we in Russia need to be prepared for it. This means being able to minimise the negative external effects on our citizens, to increase the manufacturing and supply of high-quality and affordable food on the domestic market, including fish products. This is a key objective for this year. At the same time, it is strategically important to reduce the Russian agriculture and fishing industry’s dependence on imports, including the entire chain from the field to the counter.

I would like to highlight such items as seeds and pedigree stock, vitamins, feed supplements and plant protection agents. Here, we need to clearly determine our import substitution benchmarks and pursue them assertively starting now. Considering the potential of the Russian agricultural industry, our science and industrial production, we have all the resources to succeed.

Let me remind you that after the sanctions were imposed against Russia in 2014, our producers used that window of opportunity in the agricultural sector to enter available niches in the domestic market and gain a powerful impetus for streamlined and advanced development – naturally, with support from the state and the Government.

Over the past seven years, Russia’s agricultural production has grown by 15 percent and food – by more than 25 percent. Our market is fully self-sufficient when it comes to major food categories and domestic production. For some products such as sunflower oil and grain, Russian companies have more than enough capacity to satisfy demand, creating very good export potential.

As of 2020, our country became a net exporter of agricultural products – that is, we sell more food and agricultural products abroad than we buy. It seemed almost impossible and incredible even 20 years ago. Today our exports go to about 160 countries.

I want to stress that these results were also achievable during the pandemic despite the supply chains disruptions in the world. However, our farmers met this challenge with flying colours and even elevated their status.

It goes without saying that this year, in view of the global food shortage, we will have to be more careful about food exports. We will have to closely monitor our exports to the countries that adhere to a hostile policy towards Russia.

I would like to specifically note that, thanks to the expanded scope of production, we can ensure that food prices in Russia remain lower than on the global market. Food self-sufficiency is Russia’s competitive advantage, and our citizens should feel its benefits. We must protect them from market fluctuations and price hikes on the global market. I want to stress this specifically for the Government: this work must be continuous, with a clear and visible outcome for people and businesses.

In the same context, I want to remind you that we have a floating export duty rate on grain and sunflower oil. The fertiliser market is regulated to ensure the stable operation of agricultural producers. We took those decisions pre-emptively and it was the right thing to do.

It is necessary to monitor the industry’s supply of fuel and lubricants, seeds, and breeding stock. Naturally, companies should have an opportunity to receive the loans they need to perform their current tasks. In addition, under external restrictions, it is crucial for modern equipment and spare parts to be available. I would like to ask my colleagues from the Government to report today on how these problems are being resolved. I would also like representatives of the industry who are taking part in our meeting today to assess whether the measures taken are sufficient.

I would like to emphasise again that the key task for the Government, regional governors and company directors is to preserve, support business activity in Russian agriculture. We should enable our agrarians, fisheries, and food producers in general to open up new companies, create new jobs and increase the production of groups of goods that we still have to buy in part abroad. Naturally, we do not grow bananas, and this is a separate item of our imports.

I believe we should set ourselves a quite realistic, well-grounded objective: in the next few years, our agriculture, food production and supporting industrial branches should reach much higher growth rates. As you say yourselves, and I am bound to agree with you, they should exceed three percent a year.

To achieve this, we will have to increase several times over the scale of reclamation, introduce new agricultural lands and intensify their use via nutrient application, large-scale mechanisation and modern IT. It so happens that IT is very much in demand in agriculture. Of course, it is necessary to make loans more affordable for upgrading production and the fishery fleet. We have been long dealing with it – quotas for vessels and so on – I will not go into detail now. Let us return to this next time. Today, I hope to hear specific initiatives on this issue.

I would like to add that our absolute priority is the comprehensive development of agricultural lands and the construction of roads and other infrastructure, social facilities and modern housing. It is very important to let people who work in rural areas and feed the country to live in comfortable, modern conditions. I would like you to consider these priorities in today’s discussion of the Government’s proposals.

I have already reviewed with several colleagues this morning what we will focus on in today’s discussion. Let us get down to business. I am giving the floor to Mr Patrushev. Go ahead, please.

<…>

Vladimir Putin: Summing it up, I would like to point out that, given the imbalanced global food market and the unprecedented pressure on the Russian economy and our domestic companies, it is critically important to minimise the external negative effects for our people. This is our top priority. As a result of their own policies – I mentioned this in my opening remarks – a number of countries, including those in Europe, have already seen price hikes and food shortages, and the same is happening in the United States. There are other countries, this is already happening there.

Our so-called partners will try to export these problems to Russia. We have all we need to prevent this from happening. On the contrary, we will increase the availability of food for our customers by increasing the capacity of Russian enterprises and improving food supplies to the domestic market and grocery stores.

In addition to monitoring the situation at all times, it is necessary to use the entire arsenal of means and tools offered through state support for the agro-industrial complex (we covered various aspects of this), including the customs and tariff policy mechanisms, temporary restrictions on exports, and low import duties on certain foods. I agree with these proposals. Please document these proposals. Also, the low-cost loans that we talked about on several occasions today and reimbursing food processing costs.

What specific decisions do I consider necessary to formulate or support, since the proposals have already been made?

First, it is imperative to ensure stable operation of agricultural businesses this year. In this regard, I support the Government’s proposal to allocate at least an additional 153 billion rubles from the federal budget (please think about how to make this work and report back to me, I am ready to support it) and, of course, direct these funds primarily to soft short-term and investment loans for the industry.

Second, our systemic goal is to ensure a reliable supply of fertiliser to our agricultural producers. Here, the Ministry of Industry and Trade and the entire Government need to follow the situation very closely. Our farmers’ needs should be the top priority. Nevertheless, I propose leaving the current contract-based arrangements in place. As far as I remember, they have three components: the regions, producers, and agricultural producers. We will not be switching to export licensing yet. Please keep this in mind. This does not mean that we have decided on it once and for all. No. We will give it more thought, but we will not be changing anything yet.

Third. As I have said, it is important to reduce imports in the production of Russian agricultural produce. Seed production is one of the main areas here, as well as the development and introduction of Russian breeding solutions, including in cattle and poultry farming. This year, we will allocate at least an additional five billion rubles to support seed-growing and breeding centres.

Fourth, it is necessary to significantly step up our own, Russian manufacture of agricultural machinery, food equipment and components, as well as fishing vessels. We have hardly spoken about this today, but it is a very important area. Moreover, this should be done without delay, at a fast, dynamic pace. We will discuss approaches to addressing this issue in the near future. I would like to ask the Government to systematise all proposals and provide the necessary funding for the relevant programmes.

And the last thing. In 2020, the Agricultural and Fishing Development Strategy was adopted. It is clear that today enterprises in these sectors have faced new challenges that will stay with us for a long time. In this regard, I suggest reviewing the current Strategy, adjusting its targets and deadlines, and providing for a comprehensive set of state support measures and the necessary amount of budgetary funds, including for land reclamation and agricultural use, as well as for establishing new areas for exports of finished products.

Development of the agriculture and food industry as modern, dynamic spheres of our economy with an annual growth rate faster than that of the overall economic growth must be the key objective of the adopted Strategy. I would like to ask the Government and the State Council to adjust the Strategy by July 1, 2022.

And once again about fertilisers. I would like to say this once again: let us not make any changes today and agree with the proposal of the Ministry of Agriculture in general, but I suggest discussing this issue once again soon. Let me repeat, I would like to stress it: we do not want to harm anyone. Not ever. We should carefully deal with all this: logistics, insurers, everyone. There is a deficit today. It will be Bought up. It will be. Nobody wants to die of hunger. We must carefully look at all these problems and solve them, primarily based on our own interests.

Thank you very much. All the best.



////



Meeting with permanent members of the Security Council
Event_Date: 1/4/2022
Event_Time: 15:30
Event_Place: Novo-Ogaryovo_Moscow_Region

Colleagues, good afternoon.

Today’s agenda focuses on the situation in the aviation industry. We have long wanted to discuss these issues holistically, and today we will talk about it in more detail.

However, I would like to begin with something we discussed last week.

Today I signed an Executive Order establishing the rules for trading Russian natural gas with so-called unfriendly states. We have offered our counterparties from these countries a clear and transparent procedure. To purchase Russian natural gas, they will have to open ruble accounts with Russian banks to be used to pay for gas distribution starting tomorrow, on April 1 of this year.

If no payment is made, we will consider this a default on the part of the purchaser – with all the ensuing consequences. No one sells us anything without payment, and we are not doing charity either. This means the current contracts will be suspended.

I emphasise this again – in a situation where the Western countries’ financial systems are being used as a weapon, when companies from these countries refuse to fulfill their contracts with Russian banks, enterprises, and individuals, when our dollar and euro assets are frozen, it makes no sense to use those countries’ currencies.

In fact, what has been happening? We supplied resources to our European customers – in this case, gas. They received it and paid in euros – which they later had frozen. Thus, we have reasons to believe that some of the gas supplied to Europe was essentially provided free of charge.

Obviously, this cannot continue, especially considering that, should we continue to supply gas under the same process, euro or dollar payments could once again be blocked. This development is quite possible, especially given that some Western politicians have been talking about it publicly. Moreover, EU heads of governments have been suggesting similar approaches. This kind of risk is, of course, unacceptable to us.

If we look at this issue from a general perspective, converting to gas payments in Russian rubles is an important step towards reinforcing our financial and economic sovereignty. It has been our long-term plan to consistently and gradually move in this direction, increasing the share of national currency transactions in foreign trade – that is, in our currency and the currency of our reliable partners.

You may have already heard that many long-time energy suppliers in the world market are also talking about diversifying transaction currencies.

To reiterate, Russia values its business reputation. We fulfill and we will continue to fulfill our obligations under all contracts, including our gas contracts. We will continue to supply gas as agreed and, I would like to stress, at the rates specified in the effective long-term contracts.

I want to stress that these rates are several times lower than the current rates on the spot market. What does this mean? In simple terms, Russian gas means cheaper energy, heat and power in European homes, affordable fertilisers for European farmers and, consequently, cheaper food. Finally, it means higher competitiveness for European companies and higher wages for European citizens.

However, judging by the statements made by some politicians, they are willing to disregard their citizens’ interests so they can enjoy the good graces of their overseas master and overlord. This is the opposite of populism. People are urged to eat less, put on more clothes, and use less heating, give up on travel – presumably for the benefit of the people who are demanding this kind of voluntary deprivation as a sign of some abstract North Atlantic solidarity.

This is not the first year that we have been observing such questionable approaches and actions in the economic, energy and food policy of the Western countries.

Incidentally, the food crisis will inevitably be followed by another one, another wave of migration, primarily to the European countries.

Regardless of this, the decisions that are being made, one after another, are pushing the global economy towards crisis. They are leading to the disruption of production and logistics chains, an increase in global inflation and the aggravation of inequality, to a decline in the living standards of millions of people, and to the tragedy of mass famine in the poorest countries, as I have just said.

Naturally, the question arises: Who is responsible for this? Who will be held accountable for this?

Obviously, the United States will again try to resolve its problems – just its own problems – at the expense of others. In part, it will trigger a new wave of emission and budget deficits. The deficit has soared enormously and inflation is setting records in both the leading European countries and in the United States. In the process, they are trying to blame us for their own economic mistakes; they are always looking for someone to blame. This is perfectly clear, we are aware of this.

I would add that the United States will also try to make money on the current global instability, as it did during WWI and WWII, and its aggressions against Yugoslavia, Iraq and Syria, to name a few. Global markets are falling while the stock value of the companies from the US military-industrial complex is going up all the time. Money is flowing away to the United States, depriving the other regions of the world of development resources.

Attempts to do everything possible to push Europe towards expensive American liquid natural gas fall into the same category. As a result, the Europeans are not only compelled to dip into their pockets but actually to undermine the competitiveness of European companies with their own hands, to remove them from the global market. For Europe, this means large-scale de-industrialisation and the loss of millions of jobs. Another consequence is a drastic reduction in living standards against the backdrop of price increases on food, petrol, electricity, housing and utilities.

This is the price the ruling Western elite are telling people to pay, as I said, for their ambitions and short sighted actions – both in politics and the economy, including the economic war that they are trying to unleash, or in fact have already unleased against Russia.

This did not start just now, nor in the past month. Illegal sanctions and restrictions have always been imposed on our country, for many years. The goal is to curb Russia’s development, undermine our sovereignty, and weaken our industrial, financial and technological potential.

I will repeat that all these sanctions have been prepared in advance and would have been imposed in any case. I would like to emphasise this point. In effect, these are sanctions against our right to freedom, to be independent, to be Russia. They are imposed because we do not want to dance to their tune and to sacrifice our national interests and traditional values.

The “collective West” does not seem willing to abandon its policy of economic pressure on Russia. Moreover, it is certainly going to try to find more reasons for sanctions, or rather pretexts. One can hardly count on any change in their approach, at least in the near future.

In this regard, I am asking the Government, the Bank of Russia, and the regional governments, to consider this while planning their systemic efforts to promote economic growth and support specific sectors, to keep in mind that the sanctions are not going anywhere, just like in previous decades. Such is the objective reality.

What I would like to note here, and I want you to bring this to all your colleagues’ attention, when reviewing each specific industry or sector, we need to focus not only on overcoming the challenges of this year, but also work out long-term development plans based on the internal capabilities of our economy, on Russia’s science and education systems. We must primarily rely on private business initiatives and healthy competition, striving to maximise the employment of our industrial facilities, to develop new competencies and generally increase Russia’s international competitiveness.

At the same time, to make sure that the economic policy is effective, we need to look at key indicators like the preservation and creation of jobs, the reduction of poverty and inequality, the improvement of people’s quality of life, and the availability of goods and services. We also focused on these indicators when we were discussing the situation in construction and housing last week.

Today we will continue the series of industry-related meetings. As I have said, the aviation industry is on our agenda today, which plays a crucial role in the development of Russian industry, its high-tech areas. It is certainly of particular importance for transport services, which ensure the connectivity of the regions of our vast country.

Allow me to remind you that Russian air carriers and aircraft manufacturers were among the first to feel the consequences of the improper decisions by the Western countries. A month ago, European and American companies unilaterally refused to meet their obligations under their contracts with aviation and service companies from Russia. In fact, they deceived their Russian partners by stopping the supply, leasing, maintenance and insurance of aircraft. In addition, the European countries closed their airspace to our planes.

I will leave aside, for now, the impact of this decision on the foreign companies themselves, including damaged reputations and direct losses. I will merely note that Russian companies have fulfilled their agreements in full and were ready to continue doing so.

However, the Western countries took these steps and we must certainly respond to them. I suggest proceeding from the premise that we will not be maintaining cooperation with our former partners in the near future. We will not close ourselves off from anyone; we will not be a closed country, but we have to proceed from the realities that are taking shape.

We have every opportunity to see that Russian aviation not only overcomes the current difficulties but also receives a new impetus for development.

First, we must support our airlines so they can maintain their sustainable and rhythmic operation, to keep jobs and make air service accessible to the Russian people. As I have said, these are operational, urgent measures.

As for long-term plans, we must obviously adjust the strategy for the development of our aviation industry with reliance on our own resources and due account for the new conditions that bring a host of opportunities for Russian aircraft makers, design bureaus, and suppliers of materials, components and parts.

The share of domestic aircraft should increase drastically during the current decade (and this is, of course, an opportunity for our aircraft equipment manufacturers). Naturally, it is necessary to achieve high quality, reliability and efficiency in the process. This is also important for Russian airlines, including private companies that should also develop as dynamic and profitable businesses. Of course, this matters a lot for passengers – they must be able to buy tickets at affordable prices – something we will talk more about later – while the level of safety, comfort and services must match the highest standards. I am referring now not only to interregional flights but also to the development of small aviation and services to difficult-to-access, remote areas.

I would like to ask you today to speak in detail about solutions that will allow our industry to develop the production of a broad range of domestic aircraft. We are endlessly discussing this issue with you. It is also important to make sure that technical maintenance and aircraft repair meet the highest requirements.

Let us start working. I will give the floor to Mr Savelyev. Go ahead, please.

<…>

Vladimir Putin: A few things I would like to say in conclusion.

As I said at the start of our meeting, it is certainly necessary to support operations of the Russian air companies, but it is of fundamental importance not to do this at the expense of passengers, as our colleagues have just said. I fully share this view. This certainly should be kept in mind. It is necessary to make air tickets widely available to people and on this basis to expand the potential of air transport, rather than force people to incur additional costs.

Let me outline a specific target: this year, the volume of domestic service should grow in comparison to what it was last year, and the passenger traffic, as of the yearend – we have just discussed this and I fully agree with this figure – should reach no less than 100 million people.

Therefore, in addition to the state support measures already in effect, including the reduced-fare tickets for travel to the Russian Far East and other regions, I ask the Government to launch the large-scale programme we have just spoken about, a programme to compensate part of the air fare for domestic flights. I am referring to flights to be performed, as it was also mentioned, between April and October of this year, the most active flying period.

The Minister of Transport has just described the specific parameters of this programme (I am aware of the debates on this matter), but, of course, I suggest that we primarily be guided by this. Nevertheless, the figure that is being mentioned – 65 billion [rubles], or 47 billion, or 113 billion, since there is no unity in the Government as to how to calculate these subsidies – let us, for starters, put the figure at 100 billion. If we have in view even ten percent of the reserves, the resultant figure will be exactly 110 billion. But we should also be mindful of the fact that this money comes in with a delay, as Mr Belousov said, and so we will be able to see, during the next four to six weeks, how this programme is implemented and, if necessary, allocate additional funds as needed. But I suggest that the calculations be based on the methodology proposed by the Ministry of Transport.

The second point: many international and domestic flights for which people have bought tickets have been cancelled (we have just spoken about this). Yesterday and today, we discussed these matters with the colleagues. It is certainly necessary to reimburse these expenses. But if in previous periods, we issued certain certificates, today it is more difficult to implement this programme because many routes are closed and we will limit people’s opportunities to use these certificates. Therefore, it is necessary to hand out the money – I accept this and I ask the Government to launch this mechanism shortly.

Third, so far, we have temporarily restricted flights to certain airports in central and southern Russia. In this connection, I suggest reimbursing regional airports for their expenses throughout their forced downtime. This will make it possible to retain their personnel, and the airports will be able to resume normal operations as quickly as possible. We must also allocate funds for these purposes in full volume. As far as I understand, our colleagues did not voice disagreement on this matter.

Fourth, lease and letter of credit payments remain a substantial financial burden for the air companies. Naturally, we have to reduce this burden. Speaking of letters of credit, I support the concept proposed by the Government and coordinated with the Bank of Russia. As for the lease payments, let me remind you that a substantial share of them was supposed to be made to companies from the so-called unfriendly countries, and they have violated their contractual obligations. In this connection, I ask the Government to draft a package of measures for resolving the issue of lease payments, naturally, taking into account the national residential status of any specific leasing company.

Fifth, new air traffic trends considered, I ask the Government to approve, by June 1, 2022, a comprehensive programme for developing the air transport sector until 2030. It is important that the programme assess future freight and passenger traffic volumes, and that it specify the routes network. It is necessary to determine the number of the required aircraft and their types, as well as measures to expand maintenance and repairs, including components, tyres, etc., using this data. I would like to note that it is necessary to formalise the Russian industry’s obligations regarding the delivery of aircraft and components to Russian airlines and delivery deadlines.

It was for this reason that I asked a representative of our largest aircraft building company about it. This should be done in the near future, as soon as possible, rather than sometime in the foreseeable future.

And, of course, this programme should prioritise air traffic safety. We must stipulate an exhaustive list of measures for this purpose.

I would like to repeat that it is necessary to draft a comprehensive programme for transforming the air transport sector, together with the allocated budgetary funds, by June 2022. I ask our colleagues to strictly adhere to this deadline.

I would like to thank those who prepared today’s meeting. I ask you to heed our agreements and matters that transcended the framework of our current discussion in your work. If necessary, you should formulate these aspects in the form of separate instructions.

Now something that is not directly linked with aviation industry or not linked at all – shipping services. I would like to ask the Minister of Transport to evaluate the situation with the use of Sovcomflot vessels by Russian consignors. They have their own freight and chartering problems. Sovcomflot also has trouble using these vessels. It is necessary to combine the capabilities and requirements of Russian consignors and carriers. I ask you to analyse this matter and to submit your proposals.

Thank you very much, and I wish you all the best.



////



Meeting with winners of 2021 Presidential Prize for young cultural professionals and for writing and art for children and young people
Event_Date: 25/3/2022
Event_Time: 16:05
Event_Place: Novo-Ogaryovo_Moscow_Region


Good afternoon, friends.

First of all, I would like to congratulate you and all your colleagues on Cultural Workers’ Day. This holiday was established to honour an enormous cohort of people, true enthusiasts who dedicated their lives to Russian culture. Magnificent and inexhaustible, our culture reflects the entire diversity of the spiritual and historical legacy and traditions of our multiethnic country. It is one of the most essential foundations of the Russian state and society that strengthens our unity and develops a sense and understanding of the Motherland in our young citizens.

Russia’s cultural space was created by the hard work and talent of many generations of artists, authors and composers, actors and musicians. It is represented by a unique network of museums, libraries, cultural centres, concert venues and folk centres. In addition to the iconic Hermitage, the Bolshoi Theatre and the Mariinsky Theatre, there are thousands of local cultural facilities across Russia. Children’s theatres and libraries are another entirely Russian achievement of cultural education, available all over the country.

Russian culture has made an invaluable contribution to the development of world civilisation. For centuries, Russian masters of literature, music and fine arts have given humankind new aesthetic traditions and, more importantly, ideals and meanings that have become moral and spiritual guidelines for millions of people and entire generations.

Russian culture is human-centric. The best classical works are focused on the inner life, personal quests and emotional experiences of human beings. They ask relevant questions, help people to think, understand and draw conclusions.

It is not surprising that the Russian mentality is known for taking things to heart. We feel very strongly about other people’s pain and injustice. We are capable of feeling sincere joy about others’ success and helping those who truly need our help.

Russian culture always protected Russia’s national identity. While readily taking in all the best and constructive, it patently rejected anything false or momentary, anything that would disrupt the continuity of our spiritual values, moral principles, and historical memory.

This unique quality reliably protects the Russian people even today, when seemingly eternal concepts and norms are being eroded and undermined in different countries, history is being distorted, and the laws of nature itself are being violated.

In a number of countries – mainly the so-called Western countries – these processes have not just permeated politics, society, sports and education, but they often run the show in these areas, they are being aggressively imposed.

Suffice it to mention the notion of cancel culture, which generally refers to public ostracism, boycotting, and sometimes withholding, even oblivion of certain obvious facts, books, names of historical and modern public figures, writers or anyone who does not fit into modern patterns, no matter how absurd they actually are.

This did not begin yesterday. For example, as we are well aware, Hollywood has regularly released films that declared the United States the sole defeater of Nazism. Those films effectively “cancelled” the courage and heroism, and the victory achieved by the Red Army, which made a decisive contribution – suffice it to consider the numbers of military units that fought on the Eastern Front, near Germany – that decisive contribution has been cancelled as well.

When Japan annually commemorates the victims of the nuclear bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August, they either bashfully keep silent about who dropped the bombs on their cities, or they write flagrant nonsense, that some abstract allies did it. This is what their textbooks say. They simply prefer not to talk about the fact that it was the United States that committed such as a terrible and unjustified massacre at the end of World War II. They have cynically decided to “cancel” this truth as well.

Children's writer J. K. Rowling, the author of books that have sold hundreds of millions of copies around the world, has recently been cancelled in much the same way for displeasing supporters of so-called gender freedoms.

Today, they are trying to cancel an entire millennium-old country, our people. I am referring to the mounting discrimination against everything related to Russia, about the trend that is gaining momentum in a number of Western states – with the complete connivance and sometimes with encouragement from the ruling elite.

This notorious cancel culture has turned into the cancellation of culture. The names Tchaikovsky, Shostakovich and Rachmaninoff are blacked out on concert posters. Russian writers and their books are banned. The last time a campaign like this happened, it was the Nazis who began destroying objectionable literature in Germany. We know well and remember from documentaries the burning of books right on public squares.

It is impossible to imagine this in our country. We are insured against this largely owing to domestic culture. For us, this is inseparable from our Motherland, from Russia where there is no room for ethnic intolerance and where representatives of dozens of nationalities and ethnic groups have lived, worked and brought up children for centuries. Our society is proud of its cultural diversity – the strength and advantage of our state.

I think many people know, have seen how a street artist painted Fyodor Dostoyevsky on a wall of a building. The West has now “cancelled” or “is cancelling” this Russian writer. This still gives us the hope that mutual sympathy and culture, which link and unite all of us, will pave the way for truth, that art and education will only promote wisdom, kindness and other time-tested values, as they should.

I am confident that it will not be otherwise in Russia. One of the confirmations of this is the creativity of the participants in our meeting – the winners of prizes for young cultural figures and for works for children.

Friends, you belong to different generations and serve in different areas of Russian culture and education. Yet, you are equally loyal to them. You are striving to multiply their rich traditions and bring up new generations of thinking and spiritually rich people who are able to perceive and pass on traditional values, who know and respect the past and present of their homeland, who are the true citizens of Russia.

<…>



////



Meeting with Government members
Event_Date: 23/3/2022
Event_Time: 16:22
Event_Place: Novo-Ogaryovo_Moscow_Region


Good afternoon, colleagues,

Today, we will discuss a number of urgent issues in great detail, and we will focus on the situation in the construction sector, considering its fundamental role in the economy and its significant social dimension.

Before we do this, I would like to speak about a subject that I consider important. We have discussed this matter with our colleagues in previous days.

As you know, a number of Western countries have made illegitimate decisions to freeze Russian assets in the past few weeks. And the “collective West” has virtually drawn a line under the reliability of its currencies. We have also discussed this aspect; and the West has compromised trust in these currencies. The United States of America and the EU have announced that they are, in principle, defaulting on their obligations with regard to Russia. Today, everyone in the world knows – they suspected it before, but now they know – that dollar and euro obligations may not be fulfilled.

I have already provided a definition for such actions, and I am not going to go into detail. It is absolutely clear, though, that given the circumstances, it makes no sense for us to supply our goods to the European Union or the United States and be paid in dollars, euros or certain other currencies.

So, I have decided to implement, in the shortest possible time, a package of measures to transfer payments, to begin with, for natural gas supplied to “unfriendly countries” to Russian rubles; that is, we will not accept any compromised currency to be used in these transactions.

At the same time, on a separate note, I would like to note that Russia will continue to supply natural gas in the agreed to volumes and for the agreed-on prices as indicated in the existing contracts. Unlike some of our colleagues, we value our business reputation as a reliable partner and supplier.

These changes will affect only the transaction currency, which will now be Russian rubles. I want the Government to direct Gazprom accordingly and to amend the existing contracts.

At the same time, all our foreign consumers should be given an opportunity to make the necessary transactions, and a clear and transparent procedure for making payments should be created for them, including the purchase of Russian rubles on our domestic foreign exchange market. I want the Bank of Russia, in conjunction with the Government, to determine the procedure for such transactions within one week.

I propose moving on to the agenda, and I turn it over to Mr Mishustin.

Mr Mishustin, please go ahead.

Prime Minister Mikhail Mishustin: Mr President, colleagues,

During the previous Government meeting, which you held, I reported in detail on the measures that have already been taken as well as our plans. These proposals are being worked out in full contact with you, Mr President, on a daily basis.

Now, I want to elaborate in more detail on the existing set of solutions to improve the sustainability of the economy.

The operational headquarters is working almost around the clock and remains constantly in touch with the regions, as new measures are being discussed. In addition to the 20 already adopted federal laws, six more laws will be submitted to the State Duma soon. About 30 draft laws and additional proposals are in the works.

To date, along with the measures already approved, about 200 initiatives have been selected, which are included in the priority action plan, and we expect that most of them will become operational by late March.

One of our key tasks is to help those who now have to pay more in interest on previously issued loans or who took out loans with floating rates. The volume of this loan portfolio is estimated at about 11 trillion rubles.

In an effort to support these companies, a special restructuring procedure has been proposed. Mr President, you and I discussed this in detail. In the months ahead, borrowers will not be required to pay the full amount of interest but can capitalise it instead and put it off towards the end of the year.

At the same time, we will analyse the financial circumstances of these businesses and adopt additional decisions to support them. To do this, the Government will draw up a list of criteria for the borrowing companies that are eligible to have these interest payments written off in full.

On a separate note, payments by individuals under mortgage loans issued before the key rate changes will remain as they were as of the end of February.

The most important thing now is to support people. A resolution was signed on the maximum amount of a loan that will allow citizens to apply to banks for a grace period. They will be able to do this through late September, provided that their income is down 30 percent from the previous year's average.

We paid special attention to the labour market. We will help those who want to find employment. Not only the unemployed, but also those who are at risk of being laid off can now use the employment centres’ services.

Many initiatives are designed to supply the domestic market with common goods. We have consulted with our colleagues in the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU) and decided to increase the limit on duty-free e-commerce to 1,000 euros throughout the entire territory. Consumer goods, primarily food and medications will have priority during customs procedures at checkpoints.

One important area concerns the health of our people. Yesterday, we approved a proposal to support the sale of pharmaceuticals and medical goods by simplifying registration and purchase procedures, subsidising loan interest rates and further implementing the import substitution programme on critical medications and medical equipment.

Earlier, we simplified procedures for the purchase of medical equipment, introduced a temporary ban on the export of foreign medical goods, and created more opportunities for medical organisations to buy equipment at the expense of the Federal Compulsory Medical Insurance Fund. This will allow hospitals and outpatient clinics to buy medical equipment for surgeries and laboratory research in any situation, while people will be able to buy the medications they need.

Our airlines have faced major difficulties under the circumstances. Many airplanes with “foreign registration” instantly lost their airworthiness certificates without which they cannot be used. Parts supplies were discontinued and bans on insurance services were introduced. Foreign leasing companies are demanding that these aircraft be returned.

Based on the law on registering the rights to foreign aircraft you signed, we received an opportunity to use them inside the country.

The Government has helped carriers keep their fleets of foreign aircraft since the very first days. We are working to resume flights with these planes as soon as possible. Importantly, in taking these steps, we are strictly following the standards of aviation law, including the international regulations.

Obviously, our main goal is to ensure flight safety. This is above everything else.

We have transferred hundreds of aircraft – more than half the entire fleet – to the Russian Registry. To normalise the situation in this area, the Government took two resolutions. First, we made the registration procedure for listing Russian aircraft in the Russian State Registry as simple as possible and reduced the duration from 40 to five working days. Second, we adopted a document establishing a special mode for implementing aircraft leasing contracts with foreign companies. We have limited the return of these aircraft and aircraft engines to the owners. Russian carriers will be responsible for the technical maintenance and repairs in accordance with international standards.

The restrictions have also affected sea vessels flying the Russian flag – they are prohibited from entering foreign ports. We will definitely not leave such unfriendly steps towards our country unanswered. The Government will introduce proportionate counter restrictions. The respective resolution has been signed.

This is far from the whole list of measures that are currently being worked out.

A large package of measures has been proposed for the construction industry. Last year, construction in Russia showed record results, and we are preparing new support options. They will help Russian builders keep the rollout of civil and industrial premises at the same high level.

A third package of measures was considered yesterday. It includes shortening the investment and construction cycle and creating related infrastructure, as well as maintaining the procedure for changing the price of a state contract as the cost of resources increases.

A number of steps have been taken to support import substitution. Yesterday, the meeting of the operational headquarters board considered the possibility of adjusting the special programme to stimulate the development of design specifications by Russian enterprises. A draft of the relevant resolution has already been submitted to the Government.

A new online service, Import Substitution Exchange, has been launched. The platform should put together a broad supplier base and ensure the replacement of certain imported components with Russian ones, thereby creating demand for domestic products and speeding up the search for potential partners. This service will help develop supply chains and replace missing imported components.

A draft Government decision has also been prepared to facilitate the provision of state support for research projects to create priority industrial products.

The Special Investment Contract 1.0 format, revived in mid-March, has been adjusted, and a corresponding resolution has been signed. Such contracts can now be extended from 10 to 12 years, if restrictive measures by their foreign partners have affected the project’s implementation. Also, the mandatory requirements for the export of industrial products and the diversification of supplies will be removed.

Furthermore, we have supported contractors in public procurement – we have allowed them to write off their fines and penalties indefinitely if they violated their obligations under Government contracts due to the external sanctions.

This week, a resolution was signed to expedite payments for products or services delivered under state corporation contracts with small and medium-sized businesses, reducing the time to seven business days, so businesses can receive payments as soon as possible.

For smaller businesses, four programmes are now available to increase the availability of low-cost loans which include new investment loans for up to three years, an easy-term lending programme implemented as part of a targeted national project, and an increase in the maximum level of risk that the SME Corporation can assume for entrepreneurs under the so-called umbrella guarantee mechanism from the current 4.5 percent to 10 percent.

Another solution is now available for small businesses in a number of industries which will apply to manufacturing enterprises, as well as institutions of culture, sport and public health, as well as the beauty industry and travel agencies. It is proposed that we extend their deadline by six months for paying taxes under the simplified system for the last year and the first quarter of 2022 followed by instalment payments during six months. This will allow businesses to postpone these payments until autumn and free up about 37 billion rubles.

Mr President, under your instructions, ways to improve support for the regions was worked through in detail. To reduce the debt burden, a fundamental decision was made to delay the repayment of debt under budget loans to a later date; and, in order to create additional resources, to expand access to treasury loans to a total of 10 percent of their yield to generate additional resources (we discussed this during a meeting with the regions) for the implementation of ongoing projects.

I would like to note separately that many of the activities under the plan were prepared jointly with the constituent entities of the Russian Federation, with whom we maintain communication at all times, day and night. The heads of the regions approached this work responsibly, and I want to thank them as well. Everyone is constantly in touch.

Along with neutralizing the consequences of sanctions, the Government will continue to address the strategic issues that you, Mr President, have identified as part of the national development goals.

The bulk of the anti-sanctions measures focus on reducing administrative burden, namely, inspections, which should have a positive effect on the operation conditions for entrepreneurs and improve the business environment in the regions.

Our priority is to maximise the flexibility of the economy, to ensure uninterrupted operation of enterprises, and to keep employment intact.

My colleagues will get into more details about other measures.

Thank you.

Vladimir Putin: Thank you very much, Mr Mishustin.

Now I have a protocol event in my schedule. But before we take a short break, I would like to give the floor to our colleagues: Dmitry Patrushev, Denis Manturov and Mikhail Murashko, so that they briefly outline measures to ensure the availability of food, essential consumer goods, medicines and medical products. Let us begin with Mr Patrushev.

As we stated at the end of last year, there is an increase in prices on the global food markets. This is due to a number of objective factors, but what is happening in Russia today also imposes additional stress on the market. It is clear that in such cases there is a rush demand. True, we can see that it has already died down, but nevertheless, we need to look at the big picture and consider all factors that are creating a certain situation in the market.

(Minister of Agriculture Dmitry Patrushev reported that Russia fully satisfies domestic demand in basic foods. According to the Minister, the Russian agro-industrial complex will generally cope with any demand for food, including in case of a significant increase. He commented on the categories where there is peak demand and talked about measures that the Government was taking to promptly organise the production of the necessary items at Russian factories and solve the current supply chain problems, as well as about the progress of the spring sowing campaign and its financial support.)

Vladimir Putin: I hope that you and your colleagues in the regions will carefully monitor any developments in retail trade and respond to them promptly.

In this sense, we have a fairly high level of reliability. The main thing here is to monitor supply chain problems and to respond to them promptly.

I apologise, but we will have a break for about 15 minutes, and after that I will ask, as I already said, Mr Manturov and Mr Murashko to report on their areas.

Vladimir Putin: Mr Manturov, please.

Minister of Industry and Trade Denis Manturov: Thank you very much.

In addition to supplying retailers with food, as I reported to you at the previous meeting, we are monitoring the availability and production of non-foods in our country. The demand for certain categories of goods was two to three times higher than usual in late February and the first ten days of March, but now it has noticeably declined. Sales of certain items are still 30–40 percent higher than in the same period last year, although demand is rapidly becoming saturated.

Accordingly, warehouse stock levels of the most popular everyday goods are returning to standard level. For example, for personal care products, children's items and household cleaning products the stock levels vary between two weeks and three months. For all these commodity groups, both Russian companies and multinationals meet the needs of the domestic market. And global producers with facilities in Russia are not going to stop them and do not want to lose their share.

(The Minister went on to give specific figures for children's sanitary and cosmetic products and other personal care products. According to him, 84 percent of detergents are produced in Russia. In the event that even a small fraction of imported goods are withdrawn, Russian and localised foreign companies are ready to increase their production volumes).

We have not noticed any surge in demand for a wide range of clothing or footwear. At the same time, given the objective rise in prices and the suspension of sales of some imported brands, our own domestic clothing production is gaining a good advantage.

Of course, our consumers are used to a variety of brands, especially foreign ones. The disappearance of some of them does not mean that the population will have problems buying clothes. There are currently more than a thousand Russian clothing, footwear and fashion accessories brands, and a favourable situation is emerging for them in terms of a more advantageous price-quality ratio.

We are in no hurry to look for foreign replacements for certain foreign brands, especially since consumers have their own preferences. Now is the time for Russian production and brands to start growing, and for new clothing and footwear chains to start appearing. We will assist our companies in this work in every possible way.

Regarding durable goods, we put together about 90 percent of household appliances and electronics, mostly of foreign make, with varying amounts of domestic content. Inventories of already-made goods will last from 1.5 to 3 months. The production of foreign components and logistics difficulties are certainly increasing costs, which is reflected at the retail end for consumers. However, producers have reserves of spare parts for several months, which makes it possible to alleviate these increases to some extent.

The companies that assemble their products on Russian territory do not plan to leave the Russian market, especially since many of them have research centres here. This confirms again that they will stay in our market.

As for the import of household appliances, our main suppliers are friendly countries that have no stake in suspending their exports.

Our furniture industry is fairly independent with the exception of probably a small amount of premium goods. Over 70 percent of furniture in the domestic market is made at home. In effect, we have always emphasised building up mass production of furniture.

The same applies to finishing building materials. In this segment, the share of imports does not exceed 4 percent. These include mostly tiles, bathroom ceramic and dry building mixes; but even for these items, domestic producers and localised companies amount to over 80 percent of sales.

According to our information, nobody plans to quit our building materials market. Moreover, it is now being evaluated by new foreign investors that have the technology, raw materials and equipment.

In general, I can say that statements by some brands on the suspension of their activities have not yet exerted serious influence on the non-food market. Only very few companies have announced a final decision to leave the market. Others are reducing advertising and pointing to supply problems but continue paying wages and the lease for their facilities. All of them understand that at the current level of competition it is very easy to give up on the market but much more difficult to come back to it later.

We continuously monitor the activities of the main companies here, primarily foreign companies, which sell non-food products in our market and will continue to do so.

Thank you for your attention.

Vladimir Putin: Even partial departure of a foreign producer will certainly create a unique opportunity for developing domestic production. This is clear.

That said, we need to do everything we can to maintain domestic competition, to prevent any monopolisation. This is absolutely clear. Of course, I would like to ask you to make sure that the range of goods in the market is broad enough for people to choose what they want.

Mr Murashko, please brief us on medical products and medications.

Minister of Healthcare Mikhail Murashko: Mr President,

If I may, I will briefly cover regulations and trade in medical products. Prior to the pandemic, we created a fairly well-developed regulatory system. By “developed” I do not mean bureaucratic mechanisms, but clear and easy-to-follow rules for trade, for both manufacturers and businesses, as well as a high level of digital technology and government systems.

Today, we can see every labelled pharmaceutical package, and we know exactly how many of them are in circulation which makes it possible for us to estimate and forecast the demand for medications.

We know the exact number and types of medical products that are registered in the Russian Federation and are purchased by medical institutions and companies under tendering procedures. These mechanisms and tools made it possible for us to respond in a timely manner to the challenges of COVID-19, when with closed borders and simultaneous global demand for medical products, we teamed up with the Ministry of Industry and Trade and the regions to provide customers and public healthcare organisations with medical products.

In order to ensure uninterrupted access to medical products for the public, we have identified six priority areas.

First, to stabilise the situation, we need a monitoring system. It involves the Ministry of Industry and Trade, the Finance Ministry, the Federal Anti-Monopoly Service and the digital technologies we are using today. We are quickly developing and approving new mechanisms to address the issues faced by manufacturers or distributors.

(As an example, the Minister cited the temporary unavailability of several medications in pharmacies, the sales of which, in early March, increased greatly due to the fact that people were buying them up and hoarding, which caused delays in the supply chains. Addressing the public, Mikhail Murashko said that manufacturers and distributors have no problems with production or stock. Currently, the public healthcare system has ample supplies of these medicines, and there is no need to stock up on them.)

Yesterday, we gathered together major federal suppliers, and they told us that consumption rates are back to March 2021 levels. Production and deliveries continue as planned.

Preventing auction-related risks during this period is the second most important area of focus for us. The Government has amended the law to simplify the procedure for purchasing medical goods and expendable materials, as Mr Mishustin mentioned in his remarks.

As per your instructions, Mr President, we have established the Federal Centre for Planning and Organising Provision of Medicines for Citizens for centralised purchases of medicines under the state programme “14 cost-intensive nosologies” – it covers the provision of medicines for people with Hepatitis and HIV. In particular, we are purchasing large amounts of medicines for the Circle of Kindness Foundation. Purchases will fully cover our needs; as of now, 85 percent of medicines have been delivered. We do not envisage any risk for chronic patients from these groups. This system has been used for many years for the timely supply of medicines to each patient.

I would like to note that by increasing the volume of contracted batches and by signing long-term contracts, we are saving budgetary funds and reducing logistics and storage costs.

We are already making plans for 2023 to ensure guaranteed contracts for producers and for the timely delivery of medicines to patients.

The fourth priority area is using these mechanisms for the distribution of medical products. We are working with the Ministry of Industry and Trade, with a focus on domestic producers.

With this in view, we have prepared priority lists of medical products to be created and produced and have sent them to the Ministry of Industry and Trade and the Russian Academy of Sciences. Russia has the necessary competencies for many of them.

Our next priority is to remove the obstacles to the delivery of effective quality medical products to the Russian market. This involves the special registration procedures needed to validate a products’ effectiveness and safety. Therefore, to be able to launch a direct dialogue and to create clear and understandable procedures, we have amended the medical products file. This will facilitate the work of producers and will reduce the period of consideration.

We are also creating a hotline on medicines at an expert facility.

We are holding consultations on the registration of medical products. This is a complex area, which is why we need such consultations.

And the sixth and final priority concerns the highly sensitive issue of medicine price control. This is being done within the framework of state regulation of prices of vital and essential medicines. These prices are fixed and can only be changed for objective reasons to ensure affordability for users, including at pharmacies.

In conclusion, I would like to point out that the measures we have adopted, and are still considering at the interdepartmental level, have a cumulative effect and are aimed at ensuring physical availability and price affordability, as well as diversity of medical products.

Thank you. This concludes my report.

Vladimir Putin: Thank you.

I would like to repeat what I said after Mr Manturov’s report.

The departure or potential departure of some foreign producers from our market creates unique opportunities for domestic companies. This is how it was with the development of our agro-industrial sector when we restricted the activities of some foreign producers of agricultural products and the processing industry in our market.

Obviously, at this point we must support our producers. At the beginning of our meeting, the Prime Minister talked about a number of measures that the Government is taking to make this support tangible. I know the Government is working on other measures as well. It is necessary to continue working on this together, in cooperation both with the Bank of Russia and the Executive Office.

These efforts are bound to produce the desired effect, like they did in the agro-industrial sector. But of course, we must ensure quality and variety and enhance rather than hurt the competitive environment in the market. I am hoping this is how it will be, and I do not have any doubts about this.

Let’s turn to the next item, which is the main issue. Today we will review the implementation of our programmes on developing infrastructure, building capital facilities, including schools and hospitals. We will discuss separately the mechanisms for supporting housing construction, one of the main sectors in our national economy.

Let me recall that at a recent meeting with the regions held on March 16, we made several important decisions on this. Let’s discuss how they are proceeding.

What are these about? Some issues were already mentioned, but I will repeat them.

First, we decided that public capital investment would be funded as a priority. Supplies of materials and the implementation of projects must be funded in full as planned. As for the implementation of projects as such, this needs to be more flexible and open to different technological solutions and the use of components within a given range.

At this point, I would like to point out that many of the projects already initiated in the regions have faced an objective increase in estimated costs. By the way, this was also the case in the previous period, but now it is even more obvious. To avoid disrupting construction schedules and to compensate for price increases on construction materials, we agreed last December, well before the current events, to allocate additional resources to the regions. We must see that these decisions are implemented in full; this funding needs to be allocated to the regions as quickly as possible.

Second. It was decided to expand the regions' capacity to finance their expenditures. In addition to other things, the maximum amount of credit lines allocated to each constituent member of the Federation will be increased as part of a budget loan. As I said earlier, this year it is up to 10 percent of the region's total revenues. It should be noted that there should be no additional conditions to receive such a loan. The money will be available until the end of the fiscal year.

In doing so, this year we will completely relieve the regions of repaying the loans granted from the federal budget. These liabilities will be postponed for the period from 2025 to 2029, inclusive.

In addition, we will support the fulfilment of obligations on securities and commercial loans taken by the regions and municipalities. This year, budget loans with maturity dates up to 2029 will also be allocated for these purposes.

Once again, I would like to point out to our colleagues in the Government the fact that the aforementioned decisions have been taken; it is necessary to implement them without delay, to establish a regulatory framework quickly and to transfer the funds to the regions.

Third. A separate measure has been adopted to support the construction industry and ensure its consistent operations. Here we have a clear target: the mortgage loan portfolio, in nominal terms, must grow this year at least as much as last year. Of course, I understand that the situation is changing and the market is changing. This is not a simple goal, but a difficult one; we talked with our colleagues about it this morning. But it is something to strive for.

Based on this goal, our preferential and mortgage lending programmes should also be fine-tuned. I look forward to hearing your proposals on this today.

I suggest turning to the agenda. Mr Khusnullin, go ahead please.

Deputy Prime Minister Marat Khusnullin: Mr President,

To fulfil the goals you set, we have organised consistent staff work with all government bodies, all customers and all regions. Three headquarters are working and coordinating this, sometimes starting at 7.30 am. We are working like this every day and sometimes even around the clock.

The priority task we set for ourselves is to analyse the facilities under our projects in our three-year programme. Our approach is to answer the following questions: how much do they use import substitution and how quickly can we convert them to go without imported components.

Luckily, the share of imports in our construction industry is low, and so we believe our main construction projects will not see delays. On the contrary, we will expedite many projects.

With this aim in view, we have made many decisions, including those in the package of anti-crisis measures. Of these, 17 decisions directly affect the construction industry and the housing and utilities sector, and 40 decisions have an indirect impact on it. We are carrying them out according to plan; we are issuing directives. We have adopted many laws, and we are carrying out a whole set of regulations.

Now we have drafted an entirely new federal targeted investment programme with new approaches and an opportunity to regulate and adjust it with a lot of flexibility. Our goal is to complete the drafting of this programme before May 1 with due account for our three-year timeframe with a forecast for five years because this sustainable guaranteed programme allows us to quickly adjust it. Even if something goes wrong – either because of import substitution or logistics, we will be able to replace some facilities with others and will complete our annual programme, overall.

We have drafted many legal decisions for this purpose. As I said, they allow us to be flexible in our management. This is the first point.

Second, literally yesterday, we drafted a law in cooperation with the Finance Ministry. Many companies have asked us to adopt this law. It amends 44-FZ to allow the purchase of construction services on a turnkey basis: designing, prospecting, supplies and construction in one go – and then to promptly change any decisions.

We have finalised the advance payment mechanism that the regions are now waiting for, and we will issue the relevant document in the next few days.

(The Deputy Prime Minister went on to speak about controlling the rising materials costs, adding that the price hikes for metallurgy products have been stopped. He talked about providing financial assistance to the regions, expanding housing construction and maintaining the mortgage portfolio. In his words, the current mortgage portfolio is valued at 13 trillion rubles, or 11 percent of GDP. Mortgages account for 10 percent of the banking system's assets, 15 percent of overall lending, and 47 percent of retail loans. He also spoke about supporting developers.)

As for the most important measures to support infrastructure construction, we have made decisions on budget loans for infrastructure development totalling 864 billion rubles, including all the instructions that you have issued. This includes support for the Nizhny Novgorod Region, the Chelyabinsk Region, the Krasnoyarsk Territory, as well as the treatment facilities on the Black Sea coast.

At this point, only one project mentioned in your instructions is up in the air – the Northern Latitudinal Railway in the Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Area. We propose not to scrap it, just postpone it for a year, because it includes concession agreements, which they are unlikely to be able to fulfil in the current situation. It is worth 50 billion, and we propose distributing the funds among the regions. This is the first proposal.

(The Deputy Prime Minister also raised the issue of supporting the regions, in particular, granting their requests to replace previously approved projects if they have difficulties implementing those projects, which is actually an anti-crisis measure. Marat Khusnullin spoke about the work to improve housing and utilities sector, about the preparation of a major development programme for the housing and utilities sector, as well as public transport and road construction.)

Our Safe and High-Quality Roads project is the most recognisable and the most supported among Russians. It has the highest rating among all national projects.

We are working on the three main tasks and goals included in your Executive Order. One of them is to bring 85 percent of the motorways in the country’s 105 largest urban areas up to standard by 2024.

The second task is to bring 50 percent of regional roads up to standard, also in 2024. This way, Russia will have a backbone regional road network with more than 50 percent high-quality roads. The target is actually about 72 percent across the country. This is very important work.

We also continue improving the country’s backbone road network, which now includes 138,000 kilometres of roads. I once reported to you that this backbone network includes federal, regional and municipal roads, and we need to improve as much of it as possible. If additional funds are allocated, we could also start this part of our work.

We have a lot of work to do to widen roads, because many of the roads we have today need to be widened. It is much cheaper and much faster, and the road’s capacity is doubled.

In fact, we have prepared a five-year programme and are ready to submit it to the Government with the exact number of facilities we plan to build. With an allocation of about 120 billion more this year, we can guarantee that these figures will be fulfilled, and we will try to fulfil them ahead of schedule.

(Marat Khusnullin also reported on the progress of the Moscow-Kazan-Yekaterinburg motorway construction and its subsequent extension to Perm and Chelyabinsk, including rebuilding the road from Yekaterinburg to Chelyabinsk, and on the development of several legislative mechanisms for the transport sector.)

We also have a question on lending to commercial facilities. This is also a large sector of the economy. We have not worked this out yet; first we need to deal with housing. The next step is to finalise commercial construction, because this is also an important sector that is not only involved in construction, but also creates jobs.

In general, thanks to the decisions you listed, we believe we can accomplish most of our plans. Thank you for your support and constant attention.

This concludes my report.

(Minister of Industry and Trade Denis Manturov and Minister of Finance Anton Siluanov commented on the report by Marat Khusnullin.)

Vladimir Putin: Let’s sum up a bit. In general, I agree with the proposals made today.

What would I like to comment on?

First, I suggest supporting the Government’s proposals and allocating additional funds for the construction and repair of roads in the regions this year. The amount given today was at least 120 billion rubles. I propose proceeding from this sum. Now the Minister of Finance is confirming these agreements, and we will continue to do so.

Second, the special measures we discussed today in detail, are necessary to support certain sectors of the economy, including those that have faced restrictions on the export of their products. Mr Manturov has mentioned the metallurgists once again. We need to quickly deploy infrastructure plans and launch new construction projects in order to encourage demand for these products, as I said, primarily in the metallurgical industry, to increase demand within the country. Mr Khusnullin reported that the Government is already working on this. Please keep it under constant control.

Third, we have to be sure that new facilities appear on the housing market so our citizens, Russian families, have a real opportunity to purchase housing, including through mortgages.

Of course, we can see how the situation on the mortgage market has changed. And if we calculate the market rate, the real market rate on loans, then of course, it has increased noticeably. On average, it should have been about 20 percent or even more.

Let me outline our principled position: we will not change the rates for our special mortgage programmes, namely: six percent for the family mortgage, three percent for the rural mortgage, and two percent for the Far Eastern mortgage. But I would just like to point out that each of these programmes has time limits: some end in late 2022, some in late 2023, and others end in late 2024. We will talk about this later, but people should also be aware of this and plan their expenses in a timely manner depending on the family budget, when carrying out their plans to improve their living conditions.

At the same time, we will flexibly regulate our other programme – a preferential mortgage in general, which was launched back in 2020 as an anti-crisis measure. Let me remind you that we introduced it as part of a whole package of measures to overcome the socioeconomic consequences of the coronavirus pandemic. And it was temporary, also temporary. Today, the rate for such preferential mortgage is seven percent, and the maximum loan is the same for all regions and amounts to three million rubles. Mr Khusnullin said today that, taking into account the trends in the mortgage market, the Government proposed to amend this programme by increasing the maximum amount of a preferential mortgage for the capital regions – Moscow, St Petersburg and the Moscow and Leningrad regions – up to 12 million rubles, and for all other regions up to six million rubles. Let us do that. Agreed.

It is also proposed to increase the rate up to 12 percent. However, let me emphasise that even in this case it will be significantly lower, almost two times lower than the current market rate, almost twice, as I said, because it is about 23–24 percent. And this rate will be only 12.

Let us see how all these solutions work. I would like to remind you again: the target is for the mortgage loan portfolio this year to grow no less than last year. I repeat once again: it is difficult, we all understand this, but we need to strive for this. If its dynamics differ from the planned figures, it will be necessary to make appropriate amendments and adjust the parameters of the preferential mortgage.

Finally, I consider it necessary to provide additional support to developers in the current conditions. I agree with our colleagues who said this. Not only to continue simplifying the regulatory framework, but also to launch a new programme of preferential lending to construction companies that develop territories and promote projects to create high-quality modern housing.

I ask the Government to draft such a programme and start implementing it.

We have covered our agenda for today. I want to thank you all for being well prepared for today's meeting. I know it involved hard work at all levels. I hope, I am sure that all the proposed areas of work, all the parameters will certainly be achieved.

Thank you very much.

Topics



////



Meeting on socioeconomic development of Crimea and Sevastopol
Event_Date: 17/3/2022
Event_Time: 16:15
Event_Place: Novo-Ogaryovo_Moscow_Region

Good afternoon, colleagues. Hello.

We are meeting on the eve of the Day of Crimea’s Reunification with Russia.

We all remember that at that time, in the difficult weeks of February-March 2014, residents of Crimea and Sevastopol displayed courage and patriotism and formed a wall against the neo-Nazis and radicals, those who staged a coup d’etat in Kiev. People in Crimea and Sevastopol did not falter. They united and won, making their free conscientious choice – to be together with Russia.

The years since then have convincingly proved how correct and timely this choice was. It is enough to look at what is happening in Donbass today and everything becomes immediately clear.

However, today I suggest discussing the work on strengthening the socioeconomic potential of Crimea and Sevastopol and planning the tasks on which we should focus in the near future and in the long term.

I would like to note that a special programme on the socioeconomic development of the peninsula and a number of other undertakings have been consistently carried out since 2015. A total of 1,375 billion rubles have been set aside for the implementation of this programme over 11 years, until 2025. More than a thousand facilities must be built with these funds. As of today, almost half of them are ready and are already in operation for the benefit of the residents of Crimea and Sevastopol.

Our priority was to modernise and develop the transport infrastructure. A modern airport, Simferopol, has been built, the Crimea Bridge is open to motor and rail traffic, and construction work is at its final stage on Tavrida, the newest motorway.

The electric power supply to the region has become more reliable and stable, this primarily owing to the commissioning of new generating capacities, the creation of a power bridge, and the replacement of the outmoded regional electric power networks. This has made it possible to eliminate such a serious problem as protracted power outages in residential districts and at production facilities.

Step by step, we are solving the problem of providing the residents of Crimea and Sevastopol with clean, I repeat, clean, high-quality water. Immediately after 2014, we started drilling artesian wells and transferring water from reservoirs in the peninsula’s highlands to Simferopol and Kerch. Part of the water supply networks has been overhauled, which made it possible to reduce losses in the housing and utilities sector. This was a big problem, everyone is well aware, because nothing in this sense had been done there for decades. Additional water intake facilities have been built. In all the big cities of Crimea, the existing purification stations are being upgraded and new ones are being built. This is also a huge problem that will require a systemic solution and, regrettably, certain time and additional investment.

At the same time, we will have to do a lot more to expand the transport, energy and other infrastructures. In this connection, I suggest that we extend the Socioeconomic Development of the Republic of Crimea and the City of Sevastopol state programme until 2027. Its deadline was 2025, but now we need to extend it until 2027 and possibly further on until 2030, envisaging the required co-funding from the federal budget.

In this context, I would like to emphasise that the work on all infrastructure projects – where possible – should, of course, be accelerated.

Thus, it is necessary to promptly finish the construction of the final, eighth stage of the Tavrida motorway. I have used this road, and it is amazing. The last, eighth stage is more than halfway done; it is an important, key part of the road. When it opens, new convenient and modernised access roads to Sevastopol will appear. Please report today on available reserves to speed up this crucial project.

Naturally, it is important to continue the programme to create a comfortable living environment in Crimea and Sevastopol. The total volume of funding this year and for the next years must not be reduced.

I am referring to the improvement of courtyards, squares, parks and beaches. You know how this work is going on across Russia; these are very popular measures. And, of course, they are as important for Crimea and Sevastopol as they are for all of Russia. When doing this work, it is necessary to use the best Russian and foreign projects and practices, adopt new architectural solutions, and consider the residents’ proposals.

It is also necessary to step up major repair and maintenance work on regional and local roads. Mr Khusnullin reported today that overall, this work is underway in Crimea, and the allocated necessary resources – that is, there are even more resources needed – but the allocated resources are being used much more efficiently than in the previous years. A modern, convenient road network provides new opportunities for expanding economic ties, developing tourism, and improving transport logistics.

Other infrastructure tasks require urgent attention, including the modernisation of housing and utility facilities and structures, such as the reconstruction of dilapidated and obsolete water and sewage treatment networks. There is much work ahead, and the peninsula’s environmental wellbeing directly depends on it.

Modern infrastructure is the key to the development of tourism, the agro-industrial sector, and other traditional and new economic sectors on the peninsula. It is necessary to make the most of these opportunities and to support business initiatives.

Please report back today on action plans to stimulate additional investment, to strengthen the position of small and medium-sized businesses, and to create high-tech jobs.

I would like to note that indeed, Western sanctions on the banking sector and on a number of goods, and so forth, do have an impact on the economic development of the peninsula. A new package of sanctions followed the start of the military operation in Ukraine.

I said at the meeting on socioeconomic support for the regions yesterday that the restrictions imposed against Russia certainly create many problems. But, along with creating problems, they also open up new opportunities for us.

In particular, major Russian companies now have the best conditions in Crimea. Frankly speaking, they used to be afraid of some kind of sanctions, but now they have nothing to fear. They can safely develop business in the region, including banks by the way, they can start up their activities there, finding and developing new market niches. This applies to the Crimean Peninsula and specifically to the city of Sevastopol.

We will certainly support such business activity, including through the deployment of infrastructure for banking and financial services.

In this regard, one of our leading banking institutions fully owned by the state, Promsvyazbank, which actually has a presence in Crimea already, should become active in Crimea as quickly and as widely as possible. It should introduce promising banking products, lend to agricultural construction, tourism and other key industries for the region, open departments and branches, and develop its retail network there. This will indeed become a serious incentive for increasing business activity in Crimea, and will promote cooperation with partners from other regions of the Russian Federation.

Let us discuss all these matters and hear the reports.



////



Meeting on socioeconomic support for regions
Event_Date: 16/3/2022
Event_Time: 18:10
Event_Place: Novo-Ogaryovo_Moscow_Region


Good afternoon, colleagues.

Taking part in our meeting are senior Government officials, plenipotentiary presidential envoys in the federal districts and heads of Russian regions.

We are meeting in a complicate period as our Armed Forces are conducting a special military operation in Ukraine and Donbass. I would like to remind you that at the beginning, on the morning of February 24, I publicly announced the reasons for and the main goal of Russia’s actions. It is to help our people in Donbass, who have been subjected to real genocide for nearly eight years in the most barbarous ways, that is, through blockade, large-scale punitive operations, terrorist attacks and constant artillery raids. Their only guilt was that they demanded basic human rights: to live according to their forefathers’ laws and traditions, to speak their native language, and to bring up their children as they want.

During these years, the Kiev authorities have ignored and sabotaged the implementation of the Minsk Package of Measures for a peaceful settlement of the crisis and ultimately late last year openly refused to implement it.

They also started to implement plans to join NATO. Moreover, the Kiev authorities also announced their intention to have nuclear weapons and delivery vehicles. This was a real threat. With foreign technical support, the pro-Nazi Kiev regime would have obtained weapons of mass destruction in the foreseeable future and, of course, would have targeted them against Russia.

There was a network of dozens of laboratories in Ukraine, where military biological programmes were conducted under the guidance and with the financial support of the Pentagon, including experiments with coronavirus strains, anthrax, cholera, African swine fever and other deadly diseases. Frantic attempts are being made to conceal traces of these secret programmes. However, we have grounds to assume that components of biological weapons were being created in direct proximity to Russia on the territory of Ukraine.

Our numerous warnings that such developments posed a direct threat to the security of Russia were rejected with open and cynical arrogance by Ukraine and its US and NATO patrons.

In other words, all our diplomatic efforts were fully in vain. We have been left with no peaceful alternative to settle the problems that developed through no fault of ours. In this situation, we were forced to begin this special military operation.

The movement of Russian forces against Kiev and other Ukrainian cities is not connected with a desire to occupy that country. This is not our goal, as I pointed out openly in my statement on February 24.

As for the combat tactics drafted by the Defence Ministry of Russia and the General Staff, this has fully justified itself. Our fellows – soldiers and officers – are displaying courage and heroism and are doing all they can to avoid civilian losses in Ukrainian cities.

This is what I would like to say for the first time: at the very start of the operation in Donbass, the Kiev authorities were offered opportunities to avoid hostilities, via different channels, to simply withdraw their troops from Donbass as an alternative to bloodshed. They did not want to do this. Well, this was their decision; now they will understand what is happening in reality, on the ground.

The operation is being carried out successfully, in strict conformity with the approved plan.

I must note that, encouraged by the United States and other Western countries, Ukraine was purposefully preparing for a scenario of force, a massacre and an ethnic cleansing in Donbass. A massive onslaught on Donbass and later Crimea was just a matter of time. However, our Armed Forces have shattered these plans.

Kiev was not just preparing for war, for aggression against Russia – it was conducting it. There were endless attempts to stage acts of subversion and organise a terrorist underground in Crimea. Hostilities in Donbass and the shelling of peaceful residential areas have continued all these years. Almost 14,000 civilians, including children have been killed over this time.

As you know, there was a missile strike at the centre of Donetsk on March 14. This was an overt bloody act of terror that took over 20 lives. Shelling has been ongoing during the past few days. They are striking randomly at squares with the fervor of fanatics and the exasperation of the doomed. They are acting like the Nazis did when they tried to drag as many innocent victims as they could to their graves.

But what is shocking in its extreme cynicism is not just Kiev’s blatant lies and statements that Russia allegedly launched this missile at Donetsk (they have gone as far as this), but the attitude of the so-called civilised world. The European and American press did not even notice this tragedy in Donetsk, as if nothing happened.

This is how they have been hypocritically looking the other way over the past eight years as mothers buried their children in Donbass, as elderly people were killed. This is simply moral degradation, complete de-humanisation.

It was no longer possible to tolerate this outrageous attitude towards the people of Donbass. To put an end to this genocide, Russia recognized the people’s republics of Donbass and signed treaties of friendship and mutual aid with them. Based on these treaties, the republics appealed to Russia for military aid in rebuffing the aggression. We rendered this aid because we simply could not do otherwise. We had no right to act otherwise.

I would like to emphasise this point and draw your attention to it: if our troops had acted only within the people's republics and helped them liberate their territory, it would not have been a final solution, it would not have led to peace and would not have ultimately removed the threat – to our country, this time to Russia. On the contrary, a new frontline would have been extended around Donbass and its borders, and shelling and provocations would have continued. In other words, this armed conflict would have continued indefinitely. It would have been fuelled by the revanchist hysteria of the Kiev regime, as NATO deployed its military infrastructure faster and more aggressively. In this case, we would have been faced with the fact that the attack, the offensive weapons of the alliance were already at our borders.

I will repeat – we had no alternative for self-defence, for ensuring Russia's security, to this special military operation. We will reach the goals we set. We will certainly ensure the security of Russia and our people and will never allow Ukraine to be a bridgehead for aggressive actions against our country.

We remain ready to discuss matters of fundamental importance to Russia’s future during the talks. This includes Ukraine’s status as a neutral country, and demilitarisation and denazification. Our country has done everything it could to organise and hold these talks realising that it is important to use every opportunity to save people and their lives.

But time and time again we see that the Kiev regime, which its Western handlers have charged with the task of creating an aggressive “anti-Russia” stance, does not care about the future of the people of Ukraine. They do not care that people are dying, that hundreds of thousands, or even millions of people had to flee their homes, and that a horrendous humanitarian disaster is unfolding in the cities controlled by the neo-Nazis and armed criminals who were cut loose.

Clearly, Kiev’s Western patrons are just pushing them to continue the bloodshed. They incessantly supply Kiev with weapons and intelligence, as well as other types of assistance, including military advisers and mercenaries.

They are using economic, financial, trade and other sanctions against Russia as weapons, but these sanctions have backfired in Europe and in the United States where prices of gasoline, energy and food have shot up, and jobs in the industries associated with the Russian market have been cut. So, do not shift the blame on us and do not accuse our country of everything that goes wrong in your countries.

I want ordinary Western people hear me, too. You are being persistently told that your current difficulties are the result of Russia’s hostile actions and that you have to pay for the efforts to counter the alleged Russian threat from your own pockets. All of that is a lie.

The truth is that the problems faced by millions of people in the West are the result of many years of actions by the ruling elite of your respective countries, their mistakes, and short-sighted policies and ambitions. This elite is not thinking about how to improve the lives of their citizens in Western countries. They are obsessed with their own self-serving interests and super profits.

This can be seen in the data provided by international organisations, which clearly show that social problems, even in the leading Western countries, have exacerbated in recent years, that inequality and the gap between the rich and the poor is widening, and racial and ethnic conflicts are making themselves felt. The myth of the Western welfare society, the so-called golden billion, is crumbling.

To reiterate, the whole planet is now paying for the West’s ambitions and the West’s attempts to maintain its elusive dominance by any means possible.

Imposing sanctions is the logical continuation and the distillation of the irresponsible and short-sighted policy of the US and EU countries’ governments and central banks. They themselves have driven up global inflation in recent years, and with their actions caused rising global poverty and greater inequality across the world. The question now arises – who will answer for the millions who will die of hunger in the world’s poorest countries due to growing food shortages?

Let me reiterate, the global economy and global trade as a whole have suffered a major blow, as did trust in the US dollar as the main reserve currency.

The illegitimate freezing of some of the currency reserves of the Bank of Russia marks the end of the reliability of so-called first-class assets. In fact, the US and the EU have defaulted on their obligations to Russia. Now everybody knows that financial reserves can simply be stolen. And many countries in the immediate future may begin – I am sure this is what will happen – to convert their paper and digital assets into real reserves of raw materials, land, food, gold and other real assets which will only result in more shortages in these markets.

Let me add that the seizure of foreign assets and accounts of Russian companies and individuals is also a lesson for domestic businesses that there is nothing as reliable as investing in one’s own country. I personally have said that a number of times.

We appreciate the position of those foreign companies who continue working in our country despite the brazen pressure from the US and its vassals. They are sure to find additional opportunities for growth in the future.

We also know those who cowardly betrayed their partners and forgot about their responsibility to employees and customers in Russia, rushing to earn illusory dividends from joining the anti-Russia campaign. However, unlike Western countries, we will respect property rights.

Here is what I would like to point out. We must clearly understand that a new package of sanctions and restrictions would have been imposed on us no matter what. I want to emphasise this. For the West, our military operation in Ukraine is just a pretext for imposing more sanctions on us. Indeed, this time they are concentrated. In the same way, the West used the referendum in Crimea as a pretext, which, by the way, took place on March 16, 2014, eight years ago today, when the residents of Crimea and Sevastopol made the free choice to be one with their historical homeland.

To reiterate, these are just pretexts. The policy of containing and weakening Russia, including through economic isolation, a blockade, is a premeditated, long-term strategy. Western leaders are no longer hiding the fact that the sanctions are not directed against individuals or companies. Their goal is to deliver a blow to our entire economy, our social and cultural sphere, every family, and every Russian citizen.

In fact, the steps designed to make the lives of millions of people worse have all the attributes of an aggression, a war by economic, political, and informational means, and it is of a comprehensive and blatant nature. Again, the West’s top political circles do not even hesitate to talk about it openly.

The verbal tinsel of political correctness, inviolability of private property and freedom of speech was blown off overnight. Even the Olympic principles were trampled upon. They did not hesitate to settle their score through the Paralympic athletes. So much for “sport being separate from politics.”

In many Western countries, people are subjected to persecution just because they are originally from Russia. They are being denied medical care, their children are expelled from schools, parents are losing their jobs, and Russian music, culture, and literature are being banned. In its attempts to “cancel” Russia, the West tore off its mask of decency and began to act crudely showing its true colours. One cannot help but remember the anti-Semitic Nazi pogroms in Germany in the 1930s, and then pogroms perpetrated by their henchmen in many European countries that joined the Nazi aggression against our country during the Great Patriotic War.

A massive attack against Russia has also been unleashed in cyberspace. An unprecedented information campaign has been launched through global social networks and all Western media outlets, whose impartiality and independence have proved to be a mere myth. Access to information is being restricted and people are being crammed full of all sorts of fake stories, propaganda, and fabrication, or simply put, snake oil. It even got to the point where American social media companies said straight out that it was possible to post calls for the murder of Russian nationals.

We realise what kind of resources this empire of lies has at its disposal but, all the same, when confronted with truth and justice, it is helpless. Russia will never stop trying to make its position clear to the whole world. And our position is honest and open, and an increasing number of people hear, understand and share it.

I want to be as direct as possible: hostile geopolitical designs lie behind the hypocritical talk and recent actions by the so-called collective West. They have no use – simply no use – for a strong and sovereign Russia, and they will not forgive us for our independent policy or for standing up for our national interests.

We still remember how they supported separatism and terrorism by encouraging terrorists and bandits in the North Caucasus. Just like in the 1990s and the early 2000s, they want to try again to finish us off, to reduce us to nothing by turning us into a weak and dependent country, destroying our territorial integrity and dismembering Russia as they see fit. The failed then and they will fail this time.

Yes, of course, they will back the so-called fifth column, national traitors – those who make money here in our country but live over there, and “live” not in the geographical sense of the word but in their minds, in their servile mentality.

I do not in the least condemn those who have villas in Miami or the French Riviera, who cannot make do without foie gras, oysters or gender freedom as they call it. That is not the problem, not at all. The problem, again, is that many of these people are, essentially, over there in their minds and not here with our people and with Russia. In their opinion – in their opinion! – it is a sign of belonging to the superior caste, the superior race. People like this would sell their own mothers just to be allowed to sit on the entry bench of the superior caste. They want to be just like them and imitate them in everything. But they forget or just completely fail to see that even if this so-called superior caste needs them, it needs them as expendable raw material to inflict maximum damage on our people.

The collective West is trying to divide our society using, to its own advantage, combat losses and the socioeconomic consequences of the sanctions, and to provoke civil unrest in Russia and use its fifth column in an attempt to achieve this goal. As I mentioned earlier, their goal is to destroy Russia.

But any nation, and even more so the Russian people, will always be able to distinguish true patriots from scum and traitors and will simply spit them out like an insect in their mouth, spit them onto the pavement. I am convinced that a natural and necessary self-detoxification of society like this would strengthen our country, our solidarity and cohesion and our readiness to respond to any challenge.

The so-called collective West and its fifth column are accustomed to measuring everything and everyone by their own standards. They believe that everything is for sale and everything can be bought, and therefore they think we will break down and back off. But they do not know our history and our people well enough.

Indeed, many countries around the world have long put up with living with their backs bent, obsequiously accepting all the decisions that come from their sovereign, looking up to it subserviently. This is how many countries live. Unfortunately, in Europe, as well.

But Russia will never be seen in such a miserable and humiliated situation, and the fight we are waging is the fight for our sovereignty and the future of our country and our children. We will fight for the right to be and remain Russia. The courage and fortitude of our soldiers and officers, the faithful defenders of the Fatherland, should inspire us.

Colleagues,

Clearly, the ongoing developments are drawing a line under the global dominance of Western countries in politics and the economy. Moreover, they call into question the economic model that has been imposed on the developing countries and the entire world in recent decades.

Importantly, the obsession of the United States and its proponents with the sanctions is not shared by the countries that are home to more than half of the global population. These states represent the fastest growing and the most promising portion of the global economy. That includes Russia.

Indeed, it is difficult for us at the moment. Russian financial companies, major enterprises, small and medium-sized businesses are facing unprecedented pressure.

The banking system was the first to come under sanctions, but our banks dealt with this challenge. They are working literally around the clock to make payments and settlements between individual clients and to ensure the functioning of enterprises.

The second wave of sanctions was designed to set off panic in the area of retail. According to estimates, over the past three weeks, additional demand for goods has exceeded one trillion rubles. However, our manufacturers, suppliers, transport and logistics companies did everything humanly possible to avoid major shortages in retail chains.

I would like to thank the business community and the teams at companies, banks and organisations, which are not only responding effectively to sanction-related challenges but are also laying the foundation for the continued sustainable development of our economy. I would like to make a special mention of the Government, the Bank of Russia, regional governors and regional and municipal teams. In the current tough conditions, you are carrying out your responsibilities admirably.

Obviously, the attempts to organise an economic blitzkrieg against Russia, demoralise our society and push us around have failed, and so we are sure to see attempts to bring even greater pressure to bear on our country. But we will overcome these difficulties as well. The Russian economy will adapt to the new realities. We will strengthen our sovereignty in science and technology, allocate additional resources to support agriculture, the processing industry, infrastructure, and housing, and continue developing foreign trade ties to tap into rapidly growing, dynamic international markets.

Clearly, in the new realities we will have to make deep structural changes in our economy, and I will not pretend that they will be easy or that they will not lead to a temporary increase in inflation and unemployment.

In this situation, our task is to minimise such risks. We must not just meet all the social commitments of the state but also launch new, more effective mechanisms for supporting our people and their incomes.

We will focus on protecting mothers and children and supporting families with children. We have already made a decision – you know about it – to introduce as of April 1 payments for children aged 8 through 16 in low-income families. The size of the payment will range from 50 to 100 percent of the subsistence minimum for every child. Currently the national average is up to 12,300 rubles. Thus, we will have a uniform system of support from when a mother first becomes pregnant until the child turns 17.

I am instructing the Government to oversee the operation of this system so that it quickly detects any changes in the material status of families. That is, it is necessary to make sure families start receiving state support as soon as possible if the parents lost their jobs or faced other difficult circumstances.

I also ask the Government to promptly analyse the efficacy of the measures to support those who have lost their jobs. Such measures must obviously be expanded, through the social contract mechanism, among other.

I am aware that the price hikes are a big blow to people’s incomes, and so we will take action to increase all social payments shortly including benefits and pensions, we will raise the minimum wage and the minimum subsistence level and also the wages of public-sector workers. I ask the Government to calculate the exact parameters for the increases.

To emphasise, even under the current difficult conditions we must reduce poverty and inequality by the end of the year. This issue remains quite solvable even now. I ask the Government and the regions to focus on this task. I will add that we understand that it is not only an economic issue but also one of social justice.

At present, much depends on the lead of the heads of the constituent entities of the Federation and their readiness to assume responsibility. I signed an executive order today on additional powers for heads of regions – they will be authorised to take flexible and responsive decisions to support our citizens, the economy and social policy in light of the situation on the ground. Let me remind you that we streamlined our steps in fighting the coronavirus in exactly this way, making it possible to consider the situation in each region, city and village – and the situation is different everywhere.

I am instructing all the departments of federal bodies in the constituent entities of the Federation to coordinate their work with the regional authorities, and governors must establish operational centres to ensure economic development and to personally lead this work.

What is the priority here?

Private businesses must play the key role in overcoming the current problems as they can quickly rework logistics, find new suppliers and increase output of in-demand products. Supporting employment, incomes and wages and supporting the stable, balanced performance of the economy in general depend on how quickly private businesses will be able to find the right solutions and take them.

That is why we must respond to external pressure with the utmost entrepreneurial freedom and with support for business initiative.

I want the Government, law enforcement agencies and oversight authorities to continue their work on lifting unnecessary administrative and regulatory barriers. Furthermore, it is unacceptable to distract the private sector and regional authorities from addressing the most pressing tasks and burden them with all sorts of inspections and oversight procedures.

The lack of working capital and the unavailability or high cost of loans is among the key problems facing companies now, and the Central Bank was forced to take appropriate measures. In this regard, I am ordering the following steps to be taken.

First, companies that fulfill orders placed by government authorities and companies partly owned by the state should be paid for the delivered goods and services as soon as possible, and reinvest the proceeds into business. In this regard, I propose increasing the amount of advance payments under government contracts. The advance payment must amount to at least a half of the total amount of a contract, and the payment term for the delivered goods and services should be reduced to seven business days. A similar decision must also be made at the level of the constituent entities of the Federation, municipalities and companies with state participation.

Second, it is imperative to improve entrepreneurs’ ability to raise additional resources from development institutions, by which I mean expanding the Project Financing Factory’s activities (it is working well, and we know from practice that its services are in demand), providing resources for business investment plans through the Industry Development Fund (which is one of the really well-performing tools), the Bank for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises, and also through regional support institutions, including guarantee funds. I hereby instruct the Government to allocate additional funds to the constituent entities of the Federation to fund these regional tools.

I want the Government and our colleagues in the regions to pay attention to the fact that the most important task is to ensure the availability of goods on the consumer market, primarily essential supplies, medications and medical products. Logistical complications and other objective problems that result in price surges must be resolved quickly. At the same time, it is imperative to rule out intervention in price regulation. The increased supply of goods and nothing else should lead to a decrease and stabilisation of prices.

Separately, I would like to address our exporters. Whenever deliveries to international markets do not run smoothly, you should send extra batches of goods to the domestic market rather than reduce your production rates. This should objectively reduce domestic prices, including those of gasoline, diesel, bitumen, metals, and other export goods. I want the Government and the Federal Antimonopoly Service, as well regional authorities, to monitor these markets at all times.

Furthermore, considering the new challenges faced by Russia, we must maintain and expand our long-term development agenda, including the implementation of all planned federal and regional projects. We must make full use of the potential of our budget system as a tool for stimulation.

As we agreed, federal funding for various projects, including construction projects, will be carried out in full. Moreover, in December we decided on allocating additional funds if construction costs went up for objective reasons.

I consider it important to note that there will be no problems with federal budget funding in the current situation. Our economy is generating adequate revenue. This means we will not have to resort to emissions. In simple terms, the Central bank will not have to print money. We have revenue – sound market revenue. The problem is not rooted in money. Let me repeat that we have the resources. The main difficulties are related to the supply of spare parts, technology and construction materials, and the need to organise the work of subcontractors. Therefore, the deadlines and the methods for implementing specific projects and project phases may be subject to change. This will require the smooth operation of government bodies and business representatives and expediting the implementation of import substitution programmes. This is an important point.

In the process, it is also important to simplify the procedure for cooperation between the regions and the federal government bodies and give the regions of the Federation more freedom in using resources and more opportunities for launching new construction projects and programmes.

Additional funding for road construction has already been allocated to the regions. I would like to ask the Government to consider an increase in funding other infrastructure facilities so work can start this year, and the possibility of building up purchases from Russian companies, for instance, with a view to upgrading public transport.

Obviously, this will be a serious additional burden on the budgets of the regions of the Russian Federation. Therefore, as we agreed, we will additionally adjust the subsidies to even out fiscal capacity. We will also use other measures for supporting regional finances. Thus, all payments on budget loans scheduled for this year will be suspended and payments on commercial loans will be replaced with budget loans wherever necessary. I would like to ask the Government to study this issue in detail and dig to the bottom of every case. Only a case-by-case approach will produce the desired effect.

In addition, the Finance Ministry will provide an additional unconditional credit line for every region. It will amount to 10 percent of total revenue with repayment no earlier than the end of this year.

We are going to maintain the same volume of infrastructure budget loans. I am instructing the Government to make arrangements for flexible management of this programme and to take account of the challenges involved in the implementation of the projects that I mentioned earlier. The regions should be able to take swift action on altering the portfolio and the contents of the projects, and focus on the ones that can be implemented as efficiently as possible in the current circumstances. If need be, we will explore the possibility of increasing the volume of infrastructure loans. This is possible and is quite feasible. In general, we will closely monitor regional finances and make additional decisions to support them, if need be.

I would like to emphasise that direct communication between all levels of government and a clear sequence of actions are of paramount importance now. The State Council and its specialised commissions have proved their effectiveness. I want the public administration commission led by Sergei Sobyanin to team up with our colleagues from the Government and to focus on problematic items on the regional agenda, to come up with the best solutions and to scale them to all Russian regions. We have gained extensive experience from combating the pandemic.

Colleagues,

Our economy, the state budget and private sector possess the necessary resources to address long-term tasks. All strategic and national goals that we have set for the period to 2030 must be achieved. The current challenges and the opportunities that they offer should mobilise us – this is what we should set our minds to in order to achieve tangible results in the interests of our people.

Clearly, we will need to fine-tune our programmes, and we welcome the initiatives coming from business circles, academics, and public associations. In this regard, I want the regions to join in organising the forum convened by the Agency for Strategic Initiatives titled, Powerful Ideas for New Times, where every Russian citizen will have a chance to present their proposals and specific projects for advancing their respective cities, regions, and our country as a whole.

To reiterate, the current developments represent a challenge for all of us. I am confident that we will come through with dignity. By working hard and working together, by supporting each other, we will overcome all challenges and emerge even stronger, as has always been the case in the thousand-year history of Russia. That is how I want you to think about this work.

Let us move on to discussing the agenda.



////



Meeting with Security Council permanent members
Event_Date: 3/3/2022
Event_Time: 19:50
Event_Place: Novo-Ogaryovo_Moscow_Region

Comrades,

On February 24 we commenced the special military operation in Ukraine. In achieving its objectives of protecting our people in Donbass and providing for the security of our Motherland, Russian soldiers and officers are acting courageously, like true heroes.

Our servicemen are fighting hard, fully understanding the righteousness of their cause. Soldiers and officers remain in position even after being wounded. They sacrifice themselves, their lives, to save their fellow soldiers and civilians.

Our servicemen and Donbass militia are really displaying mass heroism.

I would distinguish the personnel of the 100th Motorised Rifle Brigade fighting in the Donetsk area. Its servicemen under the command of Colonel Alexey Berngard breached the deeply fortified defenses in the Volnovakhi region that have been strengthened and equipped by the nationalists for almost eight years.

Tank platoon commander Lieutenant of the Guards Viktor Sokolnik destroyed fived tanks in battle.

On February 25, outside of Chuginka, company leader of the 163th armour regiment Captain Alexei Lyovkin came upon nationalist units including 15 tanks and six mechanized infantry combat vehicles. He and his personnel attacked the enemy and destroyed all the MICVs and five tanks, completing the mission without losses.

I have signed an executive order on awarding the title of Hero of Russia to Lieutenant Nurmagomed Gadzhimagomedov, regrettably, posthumously. During a battle he confidently lead his soldiers, taking care of his subordinates as a good commander should. Even when he was seriously wounded, he continued fighting to his last breath, blowing up himself, along with the militants who surrounded him, with a grenade. He did that because he knew who he was dealing with – neo-Nazis who torture and brutally murder prisoners.

I am a Russian. As they say, all my relatives are Ivans and Marias. But when I see heroes like this young man, Nurmagomed Gadzhimagomedov, a resident of Dagestan and an ethnic Lak, and our other soldiers, I can hardly stop myself from saying: I am a Lak, a Dagestani, a Chechen, an Ingush, a Russian, a Tatar, a Jew, a Mordovian, an Ossetian… It is impossible to name all of the more than 300 nationalities and ethnic groups that live in Russia. I think you can understand me. I am proud to be part of this world, part of our powerful and strong multinational people of Russia.

At the same time, I will never abandon my conviction that Russians and Ukrainians are one nation, even though some people in Ukraine have been intimidated, many have been duped by nationalist Nazi propaganda, and some have consciously decided to become followers of Bandera and other Nazi accomplices, who fought on Hitler’s side during the Great Patriotic War.

It is a fact that we are fighting neo-Nazis, which can be seen from the course of the hostilities. The nationalist and neo-Nazi units – and there are foreign mercenaries in them, including from the Middle East – are using peaceful civilians as a human shield. As I have said, there is objective data and photos of how they deploy military equipment in residential districts. They are behaving like this, like outright criminals, and instead of honouring their promise to remove that equipment from residential neighbourhoods, kindergartens and hospitals, they are deploying more tanks, artillery guns and mortar launchers there.

They have also taken foreign nationals hostage, including thousands of young people, students who were receiving an education in Ukraine. For example, they held 3,179 Indian citizens, most of them students, at the railway station in Kharkov for over a day. And they are still holding the majority of them, including 576 in Sumy. The neo-Nazis opened fire on the Chinese students who wanted to leave Kharkov, wounding two of them.

As I have said, hundreds of foreign nationals are trying to leave the combat zones, but they are being prevented from doing so. In fact, they are being held hostage; the hostage-takers are playing for time or are offering them a chance to leave via Lviv or Poland, that is, to cross the combat zone, thereby risking their lives.

Our service personnel have opened corridors in absolutely all conflict areas. They have offered transportation so peaceful civilians and foreign nationals can go to a safe place.

I would like to point out again that the nationalists are preventing them from doing this. Moreover, they are telling foreign nationals to turn to their own authorities, which have to seek the assistance of the Ukrainian Foreign Ministry. In fact, they are pushing these people into the line of fire.

The nationalists are acting even worse towards their own citizens, their own people. As I said, they are using people as human shields. Our service personnel have reported instances where people in residential buildings in the Donetsk People’s Republic – in Severodonetsk, Lisichansk and other towns – are forced to gather in the middle floors; the windows and walls in the lower floors are broken open to mount heavy weaponry such as cannons, and tanks, and machineguns, and snipers are placed on the roof and on the upper floors.

It is only fascists that did this, they were the ones that treated civilians so inhumanely when Soviet forces were fighting them, including as they were liberating Ukraine.

I would like to repeat that our soldiers and officers are trying to prevent civilian casualties, and regrettably, they are sustaining losses while doing this.

It is our duty to support the families of our dead and wounded comrades, who fight for the security of our Fatherland, for our people, for the people of Russia.

All family members of the servicemen who have perished during this special military operation in Ukraine will be issued a death gratuity and a one-time payment of 7,421,000 rubles. Monthly compensation will also be paid to each family member of the deceased.

In addition, I consider it necessary to approve an additional payment of 5 million rubles to each family of Defence Ministry service members, and service members and other personnel of the other security agencies killed during the operation.

Any service personnel wounded during the operation will be issued benefit payments as well. I am referring to insurance benefits and one-time payments for being wounded, injured or for receiving a concussion.

Wounded contract service personnel found unfit for duty will be issued a one-time payment of 2,968,000 rubles, and a monthly payment in case of permanent disability. All these measures are provided for by law.

At the same time, I believe that an additional payment of 3 million rubles should be stipulated for Defence Ministry service personnel and service members and other personnel of other security agencies who are wounded during the operation.

I would like to emphasise once again that our men and officers are fighting in Ukraine for Russia, for a peaceful life for the citizens of Donbass, and for the denazification and demilitarisation of Ukraine, so that no anti-Russia, which the West has been creating for years right on our border, can threaten us, including with nuclear weapons, as has recently become the case.

Our people are proud of their Armed Forces. We will never forget our comrades who have been killed in action. We will do everything necessary to support their families and children, to give them an education, to support their loved ones.

Let us pay our respects to our soldiers who have died doing their military duty during this special military operation in Ukraine.

(Minute of silence.)

Comrades,

I would like to say that the special military operation is proceeding on schedule and according to plan. All the tasks are being fulfilled. The Defence Minister will report in more detail on this.

Mr Shoigu, please.



////



Address by the President of the Russian Federation
Event_Date: 24/2/2022
Event_Time: 6:00
Event_Place: The_Kremlin_Moscow


Citizens of Russia, friends,

I consider it necessary today to speak again about the tragic events in Donbass and the key aspects of ensuring the security of Russia.

I will begin with what I said in my address on February 21, 2022. I spoke about our biggest concerns and worries, and about the fundamental threats which irresponsible Western politicians created for Russia consistently, rudely and unceremoniously from year to year. I am referring to the eastward expansion of NATO, which is moving its military infrastructure ever closer to the Russian border.

It is a fact that over the past 30 years we have been patiently trying to come to an agreement with the leading NATO countries regarding the principles of equal and indivisible security in Europe. In response to our proposals, we invariably faced either cynical deception and lies or attempts at pressure and blackmail, while the North Atlantic alliance continued to expand despite our protests and concerns. Its military machine is moving and, as I said, is approaching our very border.

Why is this happening? Where did this insolent manner of talking down from the height of their exceptionalism, infallibility and all-permissiveness come from? What is the explanation for this contemptuous and disdainful attitude to our interests and absolutely legitimate demands?

The answer is simple. Everything is clear and obvious. In the late 1980s, the Soviet Union grew weaker and subsequently broke apart. That experience should serve as a good lesson for us, because it has shown us that the paralysis of power and will is the first step towards complete degradation and oblivion. We lost confidence for only one moment, but it was enough to disrupt the balance of forces in the world.

As a result, the old treaties and agreements are no longer effective. Entreaties and requests do not help. Anything that does not suit the dominant state, the powers that be, is denounced as archaic, obsolete and useless. At the same time, everything it regards as useful is presented as the ultimate truth and forced on others regardless of the cost, abusively and by any means available. Those who refuse to comply are subjected to strong-arm tactics.

What I am saying now does not concerns only Russia, and Russia is not the only country that is worried about this. This has to do with the entire system of international relations, and sometimes even US allies. The collapse of the Soviet Union led to a redivision of the world, and the norms of international law that developed by that time – and the most important of them, the fundamental norms that were adopted following WWII and largely formalised its outcome – came in the way of those who declared themselves the winners of the Cold War.

Of course, practice, international relations and the rules regulating them had to take into account the changes that took place in the world and in the balance of forces. However, this should have been done professionally, smoothly, patiently, and with due regard and respect for the interests of all states and one’s own responsibility. Instead, we saw a state of euphoria created by the feeling of absolute superiority, a kind of modern absolutism, coupled with the low cultural standards and arrogance of those who formulated and pushed through decisions that suited only themselves. The situation took a different turn.

There are many examples of this. First a bloody military operation was waged against Belgrade, without the UN Security Council’s sanction but with combat aircraft and missiles used in the heart of Europe. The bombing of peaceful cities and vital infrastructure went on for several weeks. I have to recall these facts, because some Western colleagues prefer to forget them, and when we mentioned the event, they prefer to avoid speaking about international law, instead emphasising the circumstances which they interpret as they think necessary.

Then came the turn of Iraq, Libya and Syria. The illegal use of military power against Libya and the distortion of all the UN Security Council decisions on Libya ruined the state, created a huge seat of international terrorism, and pushed the country towards a humanitarian catastrophe, into the vortex of a civil war, which has continued there for years. The tragedy, which was created for hundreds of thousands and even millions of people not only in Libya but in the whole region, has led to a large-scale exodus from the Middle East and North Africa to Europe.

A similar fate was also prepared for Syria. The combat operations conducted by the Western coalition in that country without the Syrian government’s approval or UN Security Council’s sanction can only be defined as aggression and intervention.

But the example that stands apart from the above events is, of course, the invasion of Iraq without any legal grounds. They used the pretext of allegedly reliable information available in the United States about the presence of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. To prove that allegation, the US Secretary of State held up a vial with white power, publicly, for the whole world to see, assuring the international community that it was a chemical warfare agent created in Iraq. It later turned out that all of that was a fake and a sham, and that Iraq did not have any chemical weapons. Incredible and shocking but true. We witnessed lies made at the highest state level and voiced from the high UN rostrum. As a result we see a tremendous loss in human life, damage, destruction, and a colossal upsurge of terrorism.

Overall, it appears that nearly everywhere, in many regions of the world where the United States brought its law and order, this created bloody, non-healing wounds and the curse of international terrorism and extremism. I have only mentioned the most glaring but far from only examples of disregard for international law.

This array includes promises not to expand NATO eastwards even by an inch. To reiterate: they have deceived us, or, to put it simply, they have played us. Sure, one often hears that politics is a dirty business. It could be, but it shouldn’t be as dirty as it is now, not to such an extent. This type of con-artist behaviour is contrary not only to the principles of international relations but also and above all to the generally accepted norms of morality and ethics. Where is justice and truth here? Just lies and hypocrisy all around.

Incidentally, US politicians, political scientists and journalists write and say that a veritable “empire of lies” has been created inside the United States in recent years. It is hard to disagree with this – it is really so. But one should not be modest about it: the United States is still a great country and a system-forming power. All its satellites not only humbly and obediently say yes to and parrot it at the slightest pretext but also imitate its behaviour and enthusiastically accept the rules it is offering them. Therefore, one can say with good reason and confidence that the whole so-called Western bloc formed by the United States in its own image and likeness is, in its entirety, the very same “empire of lies.”

As for our country, after the disintegration of the USSR, given the entire unprecedented openness of the new, modern Russia, its readiness to work honestly with the United States and other Western partners, and its practically unilateral disarmament, they immediately tried to put the final squeeze on us, finish us off, and utterly destroy us. This is how it was in the 1990s and the early 2000s, when the so-called collective West was actively supporting separatism and gangs of mercenaries in southern Russia. What victims, what losses we had to sustain and what trials we had to go through at that time before we broke the back of international terrorism in the Caucasus! We remember this and will never forget.

Properly speaking, the attempts to use us in their own interests never ceased until quite recently: they sought to destroy our traditional values and force on us their false values that would erode us, our people from within, the attitudes they have been aggressively imposing on their countries, attitudes that are directly leading to degradation and degeneration, because they are contrary to human nature. This is not going to happen. No one has ever succeeded in doing this, nor will they succeed now.

Despite all that, in December 2021, we made yet another attempt to reach agreement with the United States and its allies on the principles of European security and NATO’s non-expansion. Our efforts were in vain. The United States has not changed its position. It does not believe it necessary to agree with Russia on a matter that is critical for us. The United States is pursuing its own objectives, while neglecting our interests.

Of course, this situation begs a question: what next, what are we to expect? If history is any guide, we know that in 1940 and early 1941 the Soviet Union went to great lengths to prevent war or at least delay its outbreak. To this end, the USSR sought not to provoke the potential aggressor until the very end by refraining or postponing the most urgent and obvious preparations it had to make to defend itself from an imminent attack. When it finally acted, it was too late.

As a result, the country was not prepared to counter the invasion by Nazi Germany, which attacked our Motherland on June 22, 1941, without declaring war. The country stopped the enemy and went on to defeat it, but this came at a tremendous cost. The attempt to appease the aggressor ahead of the Great Patriotic War proved to be a mistake which came at a high cost for our people. In the first months after the hostilities broke out, we lost vast territories of strategic importance, as well as millions of lives. We will not make this mistake the second time. We have no right to do so.

Those who aspire to global dominance have publicly designated Russia as their enemy. They did so with impunity. Make no mistake, they had no reason to act this way. It is true that they have considerable financial, scientific, technological, and military capabilities. We are aware of this and have an objective view of the economic threats we have been hearing, just as our ability to counter this brash and never-ending blackmail. Let me reiterate that we have no illusions in this regard and are extremely realistic in our assessments.

As for military affairs, even after the dissolution of the USSR and losing a considerable part of its capabilities, today’s Russia remains one of the most powerful nuclear states. Moreover, it has a certain advantage in several cutting-edge weapons. In this context, there should be no doubt for anyone that any potential aggressor will face defeat and ominous consequences should it directly attack our country.

At the same time, technology, including in the defence sector, is changing rapidly. One day there is one leader, and tomorrow another, but a military presence in territories bordering on Russia, if we permit it to go ahead, will stay for decades to come or maybe forever, creating an ever mounting and totally unacceptable threat for Russia.

Even now, with NATO’s eastward expansion the situation for Russia has been becoming worse and more dangerous by the year. Moreover, these past days NATO leadership has been blunt in its statements that they need to accelerate and step up efforts to bring the alliance’s infrastructure closer to Russia’s borders. In other words, they have been toughening their position. We cannot stay idle and passively observe these developments. This would be an absolutely irresponsible thing to do for us.

Any further expansion of the North Atlantic alliance’s infrastructure or the ongoing efforts to gain a military foothold of the Ukrainian territory are unacceptable for us. Of course, the question is not about NATO itself. It merely serves as a tool of US foreign policy. The problem is that in territories adjacent to Russia, which I have to note is our historical land, a hostile “anti-Russia” is taking shape. Fully controlled from the outside, it is doing everything to attract NATO armed forces and obtain cutting-edge weapons.

For the United States and its allies, it is a policy of containing Russia, with obvious geopolitical dividends. For our country, it is a matter of life and death, a matter of our historical future as a nation. This is not an exaggeration; this is a fact. It is not only a very real threat to our interests but to the very existence of our state and to its sovereignty. It is the red line which we have spoken about on numerous occasions. They have crossed it.

This brings me to the situation in Donbass. We can see that the forces that staged the coup in Ukraine in 2014 have seized power, are keeping it with the help of ornamental election procedures and have abandoned the path of a peaceful conflict settlement. For eight years, for eight endless years we have been doing everything possible to settle the situation by peaceful political means. Everything was in vain.

As I said in my previous address, you cannot look without compassion at what is happening there. It became impossible to tolerate it. We had to stop that atrocity, that genocide of the millions of people who live there and who pinned their hopes on Russia, on all of us. It is their aspirations, the feelings and pain of these people that were the main motivating force behind our decision to recognise the independence of the Donbass people’s republics.

I would like to additionally emphasise the following. Focused on their own goals, the leading NATO countries are supporting the far-right nationalists and neo-Nazis in Ukraine, those who will never forgive the people of Crimea and Sevastopol for freely making a choice to reunite with Russia.

They will undoubtedly try to bring war to Crimea just as they have done in Donbass, to kill innocent people just as members of the punitive units of Ukrainian nationalists and Hitler’s accomplices did during the Great Patriotic War. They have also openly laid claim to several other Russian regions.

If we look at the sequence of events and the incoming reports, the showdown between Russia and these forces cannot be avoided. It is only a matter of time. They are getting ready and waiting for the right moment. Moreover, they went as far as aspire to acquire nuclear weapons. We will not let this happen.

I have already said that Russia accepted the new geopolitical reality after the dissolution of the USSR. We have been treating all new post-Soviet states with respect and will continue to act this way. We respect and will respect their sovereignty, as proven by the assistance we provided to Kazakhstan when it faced tragic events and a challenge in terms of its statehood and integrity. However, Russia cannot feel safe, develop, and exist while facing a permanent threat from the territory of today’s Ukraine.

Let me remind you that in 2000–2005 we used our military to push back against terrorists in the Caucasus and stood up for the integrity of our state. We preserved Russia. In 2014, we supported the people of Crimea and Sevastopol. In 2015, we used our Armed Forces to create a reliable shield that prevented terrorists from Syria from penetrating Russia. This was a matter of defending ourselves. We had no other choice.

The same is happening today. They did not leave us any other option for defending Russia and our people, other than the one we are forced to use today. In these circumstances, we have to take bold and immediate action. The people’s republics of Donbass have asked Russia for help.

In this context, in accordance with Article 51 (Chapter VII) of the UN Charter, with permission of Russia’s Federation Council, and in execution of the treaties of friendship and mutual assistance with the Donetsk People’s Republic and the Lugansk People’s Republic, ratified by the Federal Assembly on February 22, I made a decision to carry out a special military operation.

The purpose of this operation is to protect people who, for eight years now, have been facing humiliation and genocide perpetrated by the Kiev regime. To this end, we will seek to demilitarise and denazify Ukraine, as well as bring to trial those who perpetrated numerous bloody crimes against civilians, including against citizens of the Russian Federation.

It is not our plan to occupy the Ukrainian territory. We do not intend to impose anything on anyone by force. At the same time, we have been hearing an increasing number of statements coming from the West that there is no need any more to abide by the documents setting forth the outcomes of World War II, as signed by the totalitarian Soviet regime. How can we respond to that?

The outcomes of World War II and the sacrifices our people had to make to defeat Nazism are sacred. This does not contradict the high values of human rights and freedoms in the reality that emerged over the post-war decades. This does not mean that nations cannot enjoy the right to self-determination, which is enshrined in Article 1 of the UN Charter.

Let me remind you that the people living in territories which are part of today’s Ukraine were not asked how they want to build their lives when the USSR was created or after World War II. Freedom guides our policy, the freedom to choose independently our future and the future of our children. We believe that all the peoples living in today’s Ukraine, anyone who want to do this, must be able to enjoy this right to make a free choice.

In this context I would like to address the citizens of Ukraine. In 2014, Russia was obliged to protect the people of Crimea and Sevastopol from those who you yourself call “nats.” The people of Crimea and Sevastopol made their choice in favour of being with their historical homeland, Russia, and we supported their choice. As I said, we could not act otherwise.

The current events have nothing to do with a desire to infringe on the interests of Ukraine and the Ukrainian people. They are connected with the defending Russia from those who have taken Ukraine hostage and are trying to use it against our country and our people.

I reiterate: we are acting to defend ourselves from the threats created for us and from a worse peril than what is happening now. I am asking you, however hard this may be, to understand this and to work together with us so as to turn this tragic page as soon as possible and to move forward together, without allowing anyone to interfere in our affairs and our relations but developing them independently, so as to create favourable conditions for overcoming all these problems and to strengthen us from within as a single whole, despite the existence of state borders. I believe in this, in our common future.

I would also like to address the military personnel of the Ukrainian Armed Forces.

Comrade officers,

Your fathers, grandfathers and great-grandfathers did not fight the Nazi occupiers and did not defend our common Motherland to allow today’s neo-Nazis to seize power in Ukraine. You swore the oath of allegiance to the Ukrainian people and not to the junta, the people’s adversary which is plundering Ukraine and humiliating the Ukrainian people.

I urge you to refuse to carry out their criminal orders. I urge you to immediately lay down arms and go home. I will explain what this means: the military personnel of the Ukrainian army who do this will be able to freely leave the zone of hostilities and return to their families.

I want to emphasise again that all responsibility for the possible bloodshed will lie fully and wholly with the ruling Ukrainian regime.

I would now like to say something very important for those who may be tempted to interfere in these developments from the outside. No matter who tries to stand in our way or all the more so create threats for our country and our people, they must know that Russia will respond immediately, and the consequences will be such as you have never seen in your entire history. No matter how the events unfold, we are ready. All the necessary decisions in this regard have been taken. I hope that my words will be heard.

Citizens of Russia,

The culture and values, experience and traditions of our ancestors invariably provided a powerful underpinning for the wellbeing and the very existence of entire states and nations, their success and viability. Of course, this directly depends on the ability to quickly adapt to constant change, maintain social cohesion, and readiness to consolidate and summon all the available forces in order to move forward.

We always need to be strong, but this strength can take on different forms. The “empire of lies,” which I mentioned in the beginning of my speech, proceeds in its policy primarily from rough, direct force. This is when our saying on being “all brawn and no brains” applies.

We all know that having justice and truth on our side is what makes us truly strong. If this is the case, it would be hard to disagree with the fact that it is our strength and our readiness to fight that are the bedrock of independence and sovereignty and provide the necessary foundation for building a reliable future for your home, your family, and your Motherland.

Dear compatriots,

I am certain that devoted soldiers and officers of Russia’s Armed Forces will perform their duty with professionalism and courage. I have no doubt that the government institutions at all levels and specialists will work effectively to guarantee the stability of our economy, financial system and social wellbeing, and the same applies to corporate executives and the entire business community. I hope that all parliamentary parties and civil society take a consolidated, patriotic position.

At the end of the day, the future of Russia is in the hands of its multi-ethnic people, as has always been the case in our history. This means that the decisions that I made will be executed, that we will achieve the goals we have set, and reliably guarantee the security of our Motherland.

I believe in your support and the invincible force rooted in the love for our Fatherland.


////



Statements for the press following Russian-Azerbaijani talks
Event_Date: 22/2/2022
Event_Time: 19:05
Event_Place: The_Kremlin_Moscow

Mr President,

Ladies and gentlemen,

The Declaration on Allied Interaction between Russia and Azerbaijan, which has just been signed, marks the transition of our interstate relations to a qualitatively new level. This strategic document has become the centrepiece and the key result of today’s talks.

It is highly symbolic that the Declaration on Allied Relations was signed in the year when we mark the 30th anniversary of diplomatic relations between Russia and Azerbaijan. Russian-Azerbaijani cooperation has grown stronger and expanded over the past decades, and now includes many concrete, mutually beneficial projects in the political, economic and cultural spheres. We are firmly committed to further developing our truly close allied interaction based on solid traditions of friendship, neighbourly relations, mutual respect and consideration for each other’s interests.

Today, we have had a detailed discussion of the entire range of current issues on the bilateral agenda. First of all, we discussed the opportunities and prospects for building up mutually profitable trade and economic ties. I will note that our bilateral trade in 2021 rose by 16 percent to reach almost three and a half, US$3.4 billion, whereas the flow of reciprocal capital investments stands at about US$6 billion.

The Russian-Azerbaijani intergovernmental commission will hold its regular meeting soon. We also plan to send Russian business missions to Azerbaijan to study the prospects for developing cooperation in energy, agriculture and a number of other areas.

Russian businesses are interested in collaboration with Azerbaijan in electric power engineering and are ready to assist in upgrading Azerbaijan’s power grids and to join in the renewable energy projects.

Effective partnership has been arranged in industry, too. GAZ Group and Azermash launched a joint plant last year to produce commercial and special-purpose automobiles. The rolling stock of Azerbaijan’s railways and Baku underground is being renewed with Russian participation. A KAMAZ service centre is under construction in Azerbaijan.

We think it important to further enhance the interaction of our two countries in finance. A more active use of national currencies in mutual settlements and Azerbaijan’s banks joining the Russian Central Bank’s System for the Transfer of Financial Messages would obviously contribute to that.

Russia and Azerbaijan’s cooperation in medicine and pharmaceuticals is on the rise. Our countries act as partners in countering the spread of COVID-19. At the peak of the pandemic, teams of specialists from Russia’s leading medical institutions were sent to assist Azerbaijani doctors, and deliveries of the Sputnik V vaccines were organised.

Cooperation in the cultural area traditionally proceeds at a high level. The Days of Azerbaijan started in Moscow recently, with exhibitions, concerts, literature readings and many other exciting cultural events to be held. In turn, Azerbaijan will host the next Youth Forum of the two countries in early March.

We are grateful to Azerbaijan’s leadership for the support and promotion of the Russian language and culture in the Republic. Let me remind you that the country has more than 300 schools with teaching in Russia while most universities have Russian-language faculties. During the talks, the President reminded me that there are 340, not 300 schools – we are very grateful for this as we attach great importance to it, we have been unable to follow up and count. Let me say that at present over 11,000 Azerbaijani students are studying in Russia with more than a thousand of them funded by federal grants.

Naturally, we paid special attention to the issues of normalising relations between Azerbaijan and Armenia. You are aware that yesterday I had a telephone conversation with the Prime Minister of Armenia. We reaffirmed the importance of the full-fledged implementation of all trilateral agreements on Nagorno-Karabakh reached by the leaders of Azerbaijan, Armenia and Russia.

We feel it is important that life in the region is being normalised and is becoming peaceful. Over 50,000 refugees have already returned to their homes. Practical issues of infrastructure restoration and protection of the sites of historical heritage, religion and culture are being addressed.

The Azerbaijani side praised the activities of the Russian peacekeeping contingent and Russia’s overall contribution to stabilisation around Nagorno-Karabakh. Our peacekeepers monitor the situation round-the-clock, ensuring that ceasefire regime is maintained, conduct mine clearance operations, take part in humanitarian actions and render assistance to the local population. Russian military doctors are taking measures to prevent the spread of the coronavirus, including by providing Russian jabs.

We have agreed to continue efforts to unblock all economic and transport links in the region as soon as possible. This involves restoring the full volume of passenger and cargo traffic between Azerbaijan and Armenia as well as the other countries of the region and drafting concrete collaborative projects for implementation in such areas as trade, industry, agriculture, and infrastructure. The immediate participants in the process, Azerbaijan and Armenia, are interested in this, as are all their neighbours, of course.

Another priority is the launch of the delimitation and demarcation of the Armenia-Azerbaijan border. Russia has worked hard to achieve the above tasks and targets and will carry on with this. We will certainly continue to give every support to settling any controversial issues including those of the borderline, and to help in solving the current burning problems.

In general, today’s talks have clearly indicated that Russia and Azerbaijan are both interested in ensuring stability and security in the Caucasus and Caspian regions and promoting integration processes throughout the entire Eurasian space.

To conclude, I would like to express appreciation to the President of Azerbaijan for our productive joint work today. I believe that the agreements reached today will serve to further strengthen the whole range of Russian-Azerbaijani relations for the good of both countries.

Thank you for your attention.

President of Azerbaijan Ilham Aliyev: Mr President,

First of all, I would like to thank you for your invitation to pay an official visit to Russia. I am delighted to revisit Moscow.

We meet on a regular basis. We also met less than three months ago and discussed important items on the bilateral agenda and regional matters. The intensity of our meetings highlights the dynamic nature of our expanding ties.

Russia and Azerbaijan are linked by age-old bonds of friendship and neighbourliness. As the President of Russia has noted today, they are being elevated to a qualitatively new level. We have a very broad contractual legal framework. Although 245 documents have been signed, the Declaration that has been signed today has particular significance and stands out among them.

This Declaration elevates our relations to an allied level. This is a great privilege and a great responsibility. We have moved persistently towards this event, we expanded the potential of our cooperation and built upon our relations that are based on sincerity, neighbourliness, pragmatism and consideration for each other’s interests.

Practical work on the Declaration on Allied Interaction was launched just over a year ago. Since then, the relevant expert groups from both countries have coordinated a very large document with 43 clauses, which encompasses virtually all the main spheres of our activity.

The Declaration’s first clause states expressly that the parties shall build their relations on the basis of mutual respect for independence, state sovereignty, territorial integrity, the inviolability of borders and non-interference in each other’s domestic affairs.

This clause notes the nature of our relations and states that these relations have withstood the test of time and are based, as I have already said, on friendly feelings, mutual interests and aspirations for the future. Consequently, this document sums up the result of many years of joint work and opens up tremendous prospects for the future.

We will strengthen our political interaction. As before, we will support each other at international organisations, we will expand mutual trade, the volume of mutual trade, and we will address all matters on the agenda.

Today President Putin and I spent over five hours together and the time flew. Five hours of intense communication in itself is an indication of how close and sincere our ties are.

We believe that new opportunities are opening in the trade and economic sphere. The President of Russia noted a significant growth in our trade. I am sure that positive trends will increase this year.

As you know, this year marks the 30th anniversary of our diplomatic relations: in April we will celebrate this date. We approach this landmark with good potential.

We have very promising opportunities in growing mutual investment. Today we also discussed in detail the possibilities for cooperation and deepening cooperation in the transport sector, and not just in a bilateral, but also in a multilateral, regional format.

Considering the new developments in the region and the new geopolitical situation, there is a platform for cooperation, called ”3+3“ scheme. I am sure that after the first step, the members and participants of this platform will continue to cooperate, in this sphere, too. The issue of opening communications in the region was also discussed today and, I think it has very good prospects.

I would like to thank Mr President for praising our joint activities in cultural cooperation. This sphere is always a focus of the President’s attention; we can say we are giving a boost to the development of this sphere. The figures the President of Russia cited about the number of schools teaching in the Russian language and the number of students from Azerbaijan studying in Russia speak for themselves.

I would like to add that over 15,000 students are studying in the Russian departments of Azerbaijani universities, and the interest in courses given in Russian is growing. There are also offices of Moscow State University and Sechenov Medical Academy in our country, and we hope to increase the cooperation potential.

This year we also plan to restore the regular sessions of the Baku Humanitarian Forum that were suspended because of the pandemic. The forum has been and will be held under the patronage of the presidents of Russia and Azerbaijan.

Today we also discussed issues related to the involvement of Russian companies in operations in liberated areas. There is a lot of interest, and even today we have received 14 applications from Russian companies, which we are looking at closely. I believe that this new sphere of our cooperation will be useful from the practical point of view, too, and that it will promote the level of our cooperation.

And, of course, we discussed in detail the post-conflict situation in the region today. We are grateful to Russia and President Putin personally for their role in ending the war between Azerbaijan and Armenia, as well as for their efforts to attain a post-conflict settlement.

I believe that, given it has been such a long-standing confrontation that has lasted for about 30 years and given that Azerbaijan sustained such huge casualties, the fact that Azerbaijan and Armenia have now been involved in at least two international formats for over a year highlights our intentions. These formats include a working group at the level of Russian, Azerbaijani and Armenian deputy prime ministers, as well as the “3+3” platform involving Russia, Turkey, Iran, Azerbaijan and Armenia.

And, of course, we are expecting the Armenian party to completely fulfil all clauses of the Declaration dated November 9–10, 2020, as regards the withdrawal of all Armenian armed forces from the territory of Nagorno-Karabakh, as well as the reopening of lines of communication between mainland Azerbaijan and the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic. This is the Armenian party’s legally binding obligation. But, unfortunately, work is proceeding very slowly in this direction.

As I have already noted, President Vladimir Putin played an important role in ending the war and in transferring the settlement from the heated phase to the political settlement phase. Today, Russia is our main partner in the search for ways of normalising relations between Azerbaijan and Armenia.

Opportunities exist for this. Azerbaijan has repeatedly voiced its readiness to launch work on a peace treaty that would also encompass matters of specifying borders and other matters required by any countries wishing to settle relations between them.

I am confident that new regional realities will provide new opportunities. Azerbaijan aspires to a peaceful future, and we do not need a war. We have never needed a war. The liberation of Azerbaijani territory and the restoration of the country’s territorial integrity by military means was a forced measure. And our readiness to address this matter by political means during the post-war phase serves as yet another confirmation of our intentions.

I am confident that Russia and Azerbaijan will continue to make a substantial, and I would say decisive, contribution to strengthening peace in the Caucasus, to strengthening cooperation in the Caspian region and in Eurasia through joint efforts.

Mr President, thank you once again for your invitation and hospitality, and I would like to use this opportunity to wish new successes and new achievements to the friendly and allied people of Russia.



////



Address by the President of the Russian Federation
Event_Date: 21/2/2022
Event_Time: 22:35
Event_Place: The_Kremlin_Moscow


Citizens of Russia, friends,

My address concerns the events in Ukraine and why this is so important for us, for Russia. Of course, my message is also addressed to our compatriots in Ukraine.

The matter is very serious and needs to be discussed in depth.

The situation in Donbass has reached a critical, acute stage. I am speaking to you directly today not only to explain what is happening but also to inform you of the decisions being made as well as potential further steps.

I would like to emphasise again that Ukraine is not just a neighbouring country for us. It is an inalienable part of our own history, culture and spiritual space. These are our comrades, those dearest to us – not only colleagues, friends and people who once served together, but also relatives, people bound by blood, by family ties.

Since time immemorial, the people living in the south-west of what has historically been Russian land have called themselves Russians and Orthodox Christians. This was the case before the 17th century, when a portion of this territory rejoined the Russian state, and after.

It seems to us that, generally speaking, we all know these facts, that this is common knowledge. Still, it is necessary to say at least a few words about the history of this issue in order to understand what is happening today, to explain the motives behind Russia’s actions and what we aim to achieve.

So, I will start with the fact that modern Ukraine was entirely created by Russia or, to be more precise, by Bolshevik, Communist Russia. This process started practically right after the 1917 revolution, and Lenin and his associates did it in a way that was extremely harsh on Russia – by separating, severing what is historically Russian land. Nobody asked the millions of people living there what they thought.

Then, both before and after the Great Patriotic War, Stalin incorporated in the USSR and transferred to Ukraine some lands that previously belonged to Poland, Romania and Hungary. In the process, he gave Poland part of what was traditionally German land as compensation, and in 1954, Khrushchev took Crimea away from Russia for some reason and also gave it to Ukraine. In effect, this is how the territory of modern Ukraine was formed.

But now I would like to focus attention on the initial period of the USSR’s formation. I believe this is extremely important for us. I will have to approach it from a distance, so to speak.

I will remind you that after the 1917 October Revolution and the subsequent Civil War, the Bolsheviks set about creating a new statehood. They had rather serious disagreements among themselves on this point. In 1922, Stalin occupied the positions of both the General Secretary of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) and the People’s Commissar for Ethnic Affairs. He suggested building the country on the principles of autonomisation that is, giving the republics – the future administrative and territorial entities – broad powers upon joining a unified state.

Lenin criticised this plan and suggested making concessions to the nationalists, whom he called “independents” at that time. Lenin’s ideas of what amounted in essence to a confederative state arrangement and a slogan about the right of nations to self-determination, up to secession, were laid in the foundation of Soviet statehood. Initially they were confirmed in the Declaration on the Formation of the USSR in 1922, and later on, after Lenin’s death, were enshrined in the 1924 Soviet Constitution.

This immediately raises many questions. The first is really the main one: why was it necessary to appease the nationalists, to satisfy the ceaselessly growing nationalist ambitions on the outskirts of the former empire? What was the point of transferring to the newly, often arbitrarily formed administrative units – the union republics – vast territories that had nothing to do with them? Let me repeat that these territories were transferred along with the population of what was historically Russia.

Moreover, these administrative units were de facto given the status and form of national state entities. That raises another question: why was it necessary to make such generous gifts, beyond the wildest dreams of the most zealous nationalists and, on top of all that, give the republics the right to secede from the unified state without any conditions?

At first glance, this looks absolutely incomprehensible, even crazy. But only at first glance. There is an explanation. After the revolution, the Bolsheviks’ main goal was to stay in power at all costs, absolutely at all costs. They did everything for this purpose: accepted the humiliating Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, although the military and economic situation in Kaiser Germany and its allies was dramatic and the outcome of the First World War was a foregone conclusion, and satisfied any demands and wishes of the nationalists within the country.

When it comes to the historical destiny of Russia and its peoples, Lenin’s principles of state development were not just a mistake; they were worse than a mistake, as the saying goes. This became patently clear after the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991.

Of course, we cannot change past events, but we must at least admit them openly and honestly, without any reservations or politicking. Personally, I can add that no political factors, however impressive or profitable they may seem at any given moment, can or may be used as the fundamental principles of statehood.

I am not trying to put the blame on anyone. The situation in the country at that time, both before and after the Civil War, was extremely complicated; it was critical. The only thing I would like to say today is that this is exactly how it was. It is a historical fact. Actually, as I have already said, Soviet Ukraine is the result of the Bolsheviks’ policy and can be rightfully called “Vladimir Lenin’s Ukraine.” He was its creator and architect. This is fully and comprehensively corroborated by archival documents, including Lenin’s harsh instructions regarding Donbass, which was actually shoved into Ukraine. And today the “grateful progeny” has overturned monuments to Lenin in Ukraine. They call it decommunization.

You want decommunization? Very well, this suits us just fine. But why stop halfway? We are ready to show what real decommunizations would mean for Ukraine.

Going back to history, I would like to repeat that the Soviet Union was established in the place of the former Russian Empire in 1922. But practice showed immediately that it was impossible to preserve or govern such a vast and complex territory on the amorphous principles that amounted to confederation. They were far removed from reality and the historical tradition.

It is logical that the Red Terror and a rapid slide into Stalin’s dictatorship, the domination of the communist ideology and the Communist Party’s monopoly on power, nationalisation and the planned economy – all this transformed the formally declared but ineffective principles of government into a mere declaration. In reality, the union republics did not have any sovereign rights, none at all. The practical result was the creation of a tightly centralised and absolutely unitary state.

In fact, what Stalin fully implemented was not Lenin’s but his own principles of government. But he did not make the relevant amendments to the cornerstone documents, to the Constitution, and he did not formally revise Lenin’s principles underlying the Soviet Union. From the look of it, there seemed to be no need for that, because everything seemed to be working well in conditions of the totalitarian regime, and outwardly it looked wonderful, attractive and even super-democratic.

And yet, it is a great pity that the fundamental and formally legal foundations of our state were not promptly cleansed of the odious and utopian fantasies inspired by the revolution, which are absolutely destructive for any normal state. As it often happened in our country before, nobody gave any thought to the future.

It seems that the Communist Party leaders were convinced that they had created a solid system of government and that their policies had settled the ethnic issue for good. But falsification, misconception, and tampering with public opinion have a high cost. The virus of nationalist ambitions is still with us, and the mine laid at the initial stage to destroy state immunity to the disease of nationalism was ticking. As I have already said, the mine was the right of secession from the Soviet Union.

In the mid-1980s, the increasing socioeconomic problems and the apparent crisis of the planned economy aggravated the ethnic issue, which essentially was not based on any expectations or unfulfilled dreams of the Soviet peoples but primarily the growing appetites of the local elites.

However, instead of analysing the situation, taking appropriate measures, first of all in the economy, and gradually transforming the political system and government in a well-considered and balanced manner, the Communist Party leadership only engaged in open doubletalk about the revival of the Leninist principle of national self-determination.

Moreover, in the course of power struggle within the Communist Party itself, each of the opposing sides, in a bid to expand its support base, started to thoughtlessly incite and encourage nationalist sentiments, manipulating them and promising their potential supporters whatever they wished. Against the backdrop of the superficial and populist rhetoric about democracy and a bright future based either on a market or a planned economy, but amid a true impoverishment of people and widespread shortages, no one among the powers that be was thinking about the inevitable tragic consequences for the country.

Next, they entirely embarked on the track beaten at the inception of the USSR and pandering to the ambitions of the nationalist elites nurtured within their own party ranks. But in so doing, they forgot that the CPSU no longer had – thank God – the tools for retaining power and the country itself, tools such as state terror and a Stalinist-type dictatorship, and that the notorious guiding role of the party was disappearing without a trace, like a morning mist, right before their eyes.

And then, the September 1989 plenary session of the CPSU Central Committee approved a truly fatal document, the so-called ethnic policy of the party in modern conditions, the CPSU platform. It included the following provisions, I quote: “The republics of the USSR shall possess all the rights appropriate to their status as sovereign socialist states.”

The next point: “The supreme representative bodies of power of the USSR republics can challenge and suspend the operation of the USSR Government’s resolutions and directives in their territory.”

And finally: “Each republic of the USSR shall have citizenship of its own, which shall apply to all of its residents.”

Wasn’t it clear what these formulas and decisions would lead to?

Now is not the time or place to go into matters pertaining to state or constitutional law, or define the concept of citizenship. But one may wonder: why was it necessary to rock the country even more in that already complicated situation? The facts remain.

Even two years before the collapse of the USSR, its fate was actually predetermined. It is now that radicals and nationalists, including and primarily those in Ukraine, are taking credit for having gained independence. As we can see, this is absolutely wrong. The disintegration of our united country was brought about by the historic, strategic mistakes on the part of the Bolshevik leaders and the CPSU leadership, mistakes committed at different times in state-building and in economic and ethnic policies. The collapse of the historical Russia known as the USSR is on their conscience.

Despite all these injustices, lies and outright pillage of Russia, it was our people who accepted the new geopolitical reality that took shape after the dissolution of the USSR, and recognised the new independent states. Not only did Russia recognise these countries, but helped its CIS partners, even though it faced a very dire situation itself. This included our Ukrainian colleagues, who turned to us for financial support many times from the very moment they declared independence. Our country provided this assistance while respecting Ukraine’s dignity and sovereignty.

According to expert assessments, confirmed by a simple calculation of our energy prices, the subsidised loans Russia provided to Ukraine along with economic and trade preferences, the overall benefit for the Ukrainian budget in the period from 1991 to 2013 amounted to $250 billion.

However, there was more to it than that. By the end of 1991, the USSR owed some $100 billion to other countries and international funds. Initially, there was this idea that all former Soviet republics will pay back these loans together, in the spirit of solidarity and proportionally to their economic potential. However, Russia undertook to pay back all Soviet debts and delivered on this promise by completing this process in 2017.

In exchange for that, the newly independent states had to hand over to Russia part of the Soviet foreign assets. An agreement to this effect was reached with Ukraine in December 1994. However, Kiev failed to ratify these agreements and later simply refused to honour them by making demands for a share of the Diamond Treasury, gold reserves, as well as former USSR property and other assets abroad.

Nevertheless, despite all these challenges, Russia always worked with Ukraine in an open and honest manner and, as I have already said, with respect for its interests. We developed our ties in multiple fields. Thus, in 2011, bilateral trade exceeded $50 billion. Let me note that in 2019, that is before the pandemic, Ukraine’s trade with all EU countries combined was below this indicator.

At the same time, it was striking how the Ukrainian authorities always preferred dealing with Russia in a way that ensured that they enjoy all the rights and privileges while remaining free from any obligations.

The officials in Kiev replaced partnership with a parasitic attitude acting at times in an extremely brash manner. Suffice it to recall the continuous blackmail on energy transits and the fact that they literally stole gas.

I can add that Kiev tried to use dialogue with Russia as a bargaining chip in its relations with the West, using the threat of closer ties with Russia for blackmailing the West to secure preferences by claiming that otherwise Russia would have a bigger influence in Ukraine.

At the same time, the Ukrainian authorities – I would like to emphasise this – began by building their statehood on the negation of everything that united us, trying to distort the mentality and historical memory of millions of people, of entire generations living in Ukraine. It is not surprising that Ukrainian society was faced with the rise of far-right nationalism, which rapidly developed into aggressive Russophobia and neo-Nazism. This resulted in the participation of Ukrainian nationalists and neo-Nazis in the terrorist groups in the North Caucasus and the increasingly loud territorial claims to Russia.

A role in this was played by external forces, which used a ramified network of NGOs and special services to nurture their clients in Ukraine and to bring their representatives to the seats of authority.

It should be noted that Ukraine actually never had stable traditions of real statehood. And, therefore, in 1991 it opted for mindlessly emulating foreign models, which have no relation to history or Ukrainian realities. Political government institutions were readjusted many times to the rapidly growing clans and their self-serving interests, which had nothing to do with the interests of the Ukrainian people.

Essentially, the so-called pro-Western civilisational choice made by the oligarchic Ukrainian authorities was not and is not aimed at creating better conditions in the interests of people’s well-being but at keeping the billions of dollars that the oligarchs have stolen from the Ukrainians and are holding in their accounts in Western banks, while reverently accommodating the geopolitical rivals of Russia.

Some industrial and financial groups and the parties and politicians on their payroll relied on the nationalists and radicals from the very beginning. Others claimed to be in favour of good relations with Russia and cultural and language diversity, coming to power with the help of their citizens who sincerely supported their declared aspirations, including the millions of people in the south-eastern regions. But after getting the positions they coveted, these people immediately betrayed their voters, going back on their election promises and instead steering a policy prompted by the radicals and sometimes even persecuting their former allies – the public organisations that supported bilingualism and cooperation with Russia. These people took advantage of the fact that their voters were mostly law-abiding citizens with moderate views who trusted the authorities, and that, unlike the radicals, they would not act aggressively or make use of illegal instruments.

Meanwhile, the radicals became increasingly brazen in their actions and made more demands every year. They found it easy to force their will on the weak authorities, which were infected with the virus of nationalism and corruption as well and which artfully replaced the real cultural, economic and social interests of the people and Ukraine’s true sovereignty with various ethnic speculations and formal ethnic attributes.

A stable statehood has never developed in Ukraine; its electoral and other political procedures just serve as a cover, a screen for the redistribution of power and property between various oligarchic clans.

Corruption, which is certainly a challenge and a problem for many countries, including Russia, has gone beyond the usual scope in Ukraine. It has literally permeated and corroded Ukrainian statehood, the entire system, and all branches of power.

Radical nationalists took advantage of the justified public discontent and saddled the Maidan protest, escalating it to a coup d'état in 2014. They also had direct assistance from foreign states. According to reports, the US Embassy provided $1 million a day to support the so-called protest camp on Independence Square in Kiev. In addition, large amounts were impudently transferred directly to the opposition leaders’ bank accounts, tens of millions of dollars. But the people who actually suffered, the families of those who died in the clashes provoked in the streets and squares of Kiev and other cities, how much did they get in the end? Better not ask.

The nationalists who have seized power have unleashed a persecution, a real terror campaign against those who opposed their anti-constitutional actions. Politicians, journalists, and public activists were harassed and publicly humiliated. A wave of violence swept Ukrainian cities, including a series of high-profile and unpunished murders. One shudders at the memories of the terrible tragedy in Odessa, where peaceful protesters were brutally murdered, burned alive in the House of Trade Unions. The criminals who committed that atrocity have never been punished, and no one is even looking for them. But we know their names and we will do everything to punish them, find them and bring them to justice.

Maidan did not bring Ukraine any closer to democracy and progress. Having accomplished a coup d'état, the nationalists and those political forces that supported them eventually led Ukraine into an impasse, pushed the country into the abyss of civil war. Eight years later, the country is split. Ukraine is struggling with an acute socioeconomic crisis.

According to international organisations, in 2019, almost 6 million Ukrainians – I emphasise – about 15 percent, not of the wokrforce, but of the entire population of that country, had to go abroad to find work. Most of them do odd jobs. The following fact is also revealing: since 2020, over 60,000 doctors and other health workers have left the country amid the pandemic.

Since 2014, water bills increased by almost a third, and energy bills grew several times, while the price of gas for households surged several dozen times. Many people simply do not have the money to pay for utilities. They literally struggle to survive.

What happened? Why is this all happening? The answer is obvious. They spent and embezzled the legacy inherited not only from the Soviet era, but also from the Russian Empire. They lost tens, hundreds of thousands of jobs which enabled people to earn a reliable income and generate tax revenue, among other things thanks to close cooperation with Russia. Sectors including machine building, instrument engineering, electronics, ship and aircraft building have been undermined or destroyed altogether. There was a time, however, when not only Ukraine, but the entire Soviet Union took pride in these companies.

In 2021, the Black Sea Shipyard in Nikolayev went out of business. Its first docks date back to Catherine the Great. Antonov, the famous manufacturer, has not made a single commercial aircraft since 2016, while Yuzhmash, a factory specialising in missile and space equipment, is nearly bankrupt. The Kremenchug Steel Plant is in a similar situation. This sad list goes on and on.

As for the gas transportation system, it was built in its entirety by the Soviet Union, and it has now deteriorated to an extent that using it creates major risks and comes at a high cost for the environment.

This situation begs the question: poverty, lack of opportunity, and lost industrial and technological potential – is this the pro-Western civilisational choice they have been using for many years to fool millions of people with promises of heavenly pastures?

It all came down to a Ukrainian economy in tatters and an outright pillage of the country’s citizens, while Ukraine itself was placed under external control, directed not only from the Western capitals, but also on the ground, as the saying goes, through an entire network of foreign advisors, NGOs and other institutions present in Ukraine. They have a direct bearing on all the key appointments and dismissals and on all branches of power at all levels, from the central government down to municipalities, as well as on state-owned companies and corporations, including Naftogaz, Ukrenergo, Ukrainian Railways, Ukroboronprom, Ukrposhta, and the Ukrainian Sea Ports Authority.

There is no independent judiciary in Ukraine. The Kiev authorities, at the West’s demand, delegated the priority right to select members of the supreme judicial bodies, the Council of Justice and the High Qualifications Commission of Judges, to international organisations.

In addition, the United States directly controls the National Agency on Corruption Prevention, the National Anti-Corruption Bureau, the Specialised Anti-Corruption Prosecutor's Office and the High Anti-Corruption Court. All this is done under the noble pretext of invigorating efforts against corruption. All right, but where are the results? Corruption is flourishing like never before.

Are the Ukrainian people aware that this is how their country is managed? Do they realise that their country has turned not even into a political or economic protectorate but has been reduced to a colony with a puppet regime? The state was privatised. As a result, the government, which designates itself as the “power of patriots” no longer acts in a national capacity and consistently pushes Ukraine towards losing its sovereignty.

The policy to root out the Russian language and culture and promote assimilation carries on. The Verkhovna Rada has generated a steady flow of discriminatory bills, and the law on the so-called indigenous people has already come into force. People who identify as Russians and want to preserve their identity, language and culture are getting the signal that they are not wanted in Ukraine.

Under the laws on education and the Ukrainian language as a state language, the Russian language has no place in schools or public spaces, even in ordinary shops. The law on the so-called vetting of officials and purging their ranks created a pathway for dealing with unwanted civil servants.

There are more and more acts enabling the Ukrainian military and law enforcement agencies to crack down on the freedom of speech, dissent, and going after the opposition. The world knows the deplorable practice of imposing unilateral illegitimate sanctions against other countries, foreign individuals and legal entities. Ukraine has outperformed its Western masters by inventing sanctions against its own citizens, companies, television channels, other media outlets and even members of parliament.

Kiev continues to prepare the destruction of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate. This is not an emotional judgement; proof of this can be found in concrete decisions and documents. The Ukrainian authorities have cynically turned the tragedy of the schism into an instrument of state policy. The current authorities do not react to the Ukrainian people’s appeals to abolish the laws that are infringing on believers’ rights. Moreover, new draft laws directed against the clergy and millions of parishioners of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate have been registered in the Verkhovna Rada.

A few words about Crimea. The people of the peninsula freely made their choice to be with Russia. The Kiev authorities cannot challenge the clearly stated choice of the people, which is why they have opted for aggressive action, for activating extremist cells, including radical Islamist organisations, for sending subversives to stage terrorist attacks at critical infrastructure facilities, and for kidnapping Russian citizens. We have factual proof that such aggressive actions are being taken with support from Western security services.

In March 2021, a new Military Strategy was adopted in Ukraine. This document is almost entirely dedicated to confrontation with Russia and sets the goal of involving foreign states in a conflict with our country. The strategy stipulates the organisation of what can be described as a terrorist underground movement in Russia’s Crimea and in Donbass. It also sets out the contours of a potential war, which should end, according to the Kiev strategists, “with the assistance of the international community on favourable terms for Ukraine,” as well as – listen carefully, please – “with foreign military support in the geopolitical confrontation with the Russian Federation.” In fact, this is nothing other than preparation for hostilities against our country, Russia.

As we know, it has already been stated today that Ukraine intends to create its own nuclear weapons, and this is not just bragging. Ukraine has the nuclear technologies created back in the Soviet times and delivery vehicles for such weapons, including aircraft, as well as the Soviet-designed Tochka-U precision tactical missiles with a range of over 100 kilometres. But they can do more; it is only a matter of time. They have had the groundwork for this since the Soviet era.

In other words, acquiring tactical nuclear weapons will be much easier for Ukraine than for some other states I am not going to mention here, which are conducting such research, especially if Kiev receives foreign technological support. We cannot rule this out either.

If Ukraine acquires weapons of mass destruction, the situation in the world and in Europe will drastically change, especially for us, for Russia. We cannot but react to this real danger, all the more so since, let me repeat, Ukraine’s Western patrons may help it acquire these weapons to create yet another threat to our country. We are seeing how persistently the Kiev regime is being pumped with arms. Since 2014, the United States alone has spent billions of dollars for this purpose, including supplies of arms and equipment and training of specialists. In the last few months, there has been a constant flow of Western weapons to Ukraine, ostentatiously, with the entire world watching. Foreign advisors supervise the activities of Ukraine’s armed forces and special services and we are well aware of this.

Over the past few years, military contingents of NATO countries have been almost constantly present on Ukrainian territory under the pretext of exercises. The Ukrainian troop control system has already been integrated into NATO. This means that NATO headquarters can issue direct commands to the Ukrainian armed forces, even to their separate units and squads.

The United States and NATO have started an impudent development of Ukrainian territory as a theatre of potential military operations. Their regular joint exercises are obviously anti-Russian. Last year alone, over 23,000 troops and more than a thousand units of hardware were involved.

A law has already been adopted that allows foreign troops to come to Ukraine in 2022 to take part in multinational drills. Understandably, these are primarily NATO troops. This year, at least ten of these joint drills are planned.

Obviously, such undertakings are designed to be a cover-up for a rapid buildup of the NATO military group on Ukrainian territory. This is all the more so since the network of airfields upgraded with US help in Borispol, Ivano-Frankovsk, Chuguyev and Odessa, to name a few, is capable of transferring army units in a very short time. Ukraine’s airspace is open to flights by US strategic and reconnaissance aircraft and drones that conduct surveillance over Russian territory.

I will add that the US-built Maritime Operations Centre in Ochakov makes it possible to support activity by NATO warships, including the use of precision weapons, against the Russian Black Sea Fleet and our infrastructure on the entire Black Sea Coast.

At one time, the United States intended to build similar facilities in Crimea as well but the Crimeans and residents of Sevastopol wrecked these plans. We will always remember this.

I would like to repeat that today such a centre has already been deployed in Ochakov. In the 18th century, soldiers of Alexander Suvorov fought for this city. Owing to their courage, it became part of Russia. Also in the 18th century, the lands of the Black Sea littoral, incorporated in Russia as a result of wars with the Ottoman Empire, were given the name of Novorossiya (New Russia). Now attempts are being made to condemn these landmarks of history to oblivion, along with the names of state and military figures of the Russian Empire without whose efforts modern Ukraine would not have many big cities or even access to the Black Sea.

A monument to Alexander Suvorov was recently demolished in Poltava. What is there to say? Are you renouncing your own past? The so-called colonial heritage of the Russian Empire? Well, in this case, be consistent.

Next, notably, Article 17 of the Constitution of Ukraine stipulates that deploying foreign military bases on its territory is illegal. However, as it turns out, this is just a conventionality that can be easily circumvented.

Ukraine is home to NATO training missions which are, in fact, foreign military bases. They just called a base a mission and were done with it.

Kiev has long proclaimed a strategic course on joining NATO. Indeed, each country is entitled to pick its own security system and enter into military alliances. There would be no problem with that, if it were not for one “but.” International documents expressly stipulate the principle of equal and indivisible security, which includes obligations not to strengthen one's own security at the expense of the security of other states. This is stated in the 1999 OSCE Charter for European Security adopted in Istanbul and the 2010 OSCE Astana Declaration.

In other words, the choice of pathways towards ensuring security should not pose a threat to other states, whereas Ukraine joining NATO is a direct threat to Russia's security.

Let me remind you that at the Bucharest NATO summit held in April 2008, the United States pushed through a decision to the effect that Ukraine and, by the way, Georgia would become NATO members. Many European allies of the United States were well aware of the risks associated with this prospect already then, but were forced to put up with the will of their senior partner. The Americans simply used them to carry out a clearly anti-Russian policy.

A number of NATO member states are still very sceptical about Ukraine joining NATO. We are getting signals from some European capitals telling us not to worry since it will not happen literally overnight. In fact, our US partners are saying the same thing as well. “All right, then” we respond, “if it does not happen tomorrow, then it will happen the day after tomorrow. What does it change from the historical perspective? Nothing at all.”

Furthermore, we are aware of the US leadership’s position and words that active hostilities in eastern Ukraine do not rule out the possibility of that country joining NATO if it meets NATO criteria and overcomes corruption.

All the while, they are trying to convince us over and over again that NATO is a peace-loving and purely defensive alliance that poses no threat to Russia. Again, they want us to take their word for it. But we are well aware of the real value of these words. In 1990, when German unification was discussed, the United States promised the Soviet leadership that NATO jurisdiction or military presence will not expand one inch to the east and that the unification of Germany will not lead to the spread of NATO's military organisation to the east. This is a quote.

They issued lots of verbal assurances, all of which turned out to be empty phrases. Later, they began to assure us that the accession to NATO by Central and Eastern European countries would only improve relations with Moscow, relieve these countries of the fears steeped in their bitter historical legacy, and even create a belt of countries that are friendly towards Russia.

However, the exact opposite happened. The governments of certain Eastern European countries, speculating on Russophobia, brought their complexes and stereotypes about the Russian threat to the Alliance and insisted on building up the collective defence potentials and deploying them primarily against Russia. Worse still, that happened in the 1990s and the early 2000s when, thanks to our openness and goodwill, relations between Russia and the West had reached a high level.

Russia has fulfilled all of its obligations, including the pullout from Germany, from Central and Eastern Europe, making an immense contribution to overcoming the legacy of the Cold War. We have consistently proposed various cooperation options, including in the NATO-Russia Council and the OSCE formats.

Moreover, I will say something I have never said publicly, I will say it now for the first time. When then outgoing US President Bill Clinton visited Moscow in 2000, I asked him how America would feel about admitting Russia to NATO.

I will not reveal all the details of that conversation, but the reaction to my question was, let us say, quite restrained, and the Americans’ true attitude to that possibility can actually be seen from their subsequent steps with regard to our country. I am referring to the overt support for terrorists in the North Caucasus, the disregard for our security demands and concerns, NATO’s continued expansion, withdrawal from the ABM Treaty, and so on. It raises the question: why? What is all this about, what is the purpose? All right, you do not want to see us as friends or allies, but why make us an enemy?

There can be only one answer – this is not about our political regime or anything like that. They just do not need a big and independent country like Russia around. This is the answer to all questions. This is the source of America’s traditional policy towards Russia. Hence the attitude to all our security proposals

Today, one glance at the map is enough to see to what extent Western countries have kept their promise to refrain from NATO’s eastward expansion. They just cheated. We have seen five waves of NATO expansion, one after another – Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary were admitted in 1999; Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia in 2004; Albania and Croatia in 2009; Montenegro in 2017; and North Macedonia in 2020.

As a result, the Alliance, its military infrastructure has reached Russia’s borders. This is one of the key causes of the European security crisis; it has had the most negative impact on the entire system of international relations and led to the loss of mutual trust.

The situation continues to deteriorate, including in the strategic area. Thus, positioning areas for interceptor missiles are being established in Romania and Poland as part of the US project to create a global missile defence system. It is common knowledge that the launchers deployed there can be used for Tomahawk cruise missiles – offensive strike systems.

In addition, the United States is developing its all-purpose Standard Missile-6, which can provide air and missile defence, as well as strike ground and surface targets. In other words, the allegedly defensive US missile defence system is developing and expanding its new offensive capabilities.

The information we have gives us good reason to believe that Ukraine’s accession to NATO and the subsequent deployment of NATO facilities has already been decided and is only a matter of time. We clearly understand that given this scenario, the level of military threats to Russia will increase dramatically, several times over. And I would like to emphasise at this point that the risk of a sudden strike at our country will multiply.

I will explain that American strategic planning documents confirm the possibility of a so-called preemptive strike at enemy missile systems. We also know the main adversary of the United States and NATO. It is Russia. NATO documents officially declare our country to be the main threat to Euro-Atlantic security. Ukraine will serve as an advanced bridgehead for such a strike. If our ancestors heard about this, they would probably simply not believe this. We do not want to believe this today either, but it is what it is. I would like people in Russia and Ukraine to understand this.

Many Ukrainian airfields are located not far from our borders. NATO’s tactical aviation deployed there, including precision weapon carriers, will be capable of striking at our territory to the depth of the Volgograd-Kazan-Samara-Astrakhan line. The deployment of reconnaissance radars on Ukrainian territory will allow NATO to tightly control Russia’s airspace up to the Urals.

Finally, after the US destroyed the INF Treaty, the Pentagon has been openly developing many land-based attack weapons, including ballistic missiles that are capable of hitting targets at a distance of up to 5,500 km. If deployed in Ukraine, such systems will be able to hit targets in Russia’s entire European part. The flying time of Tomahawk cruise missiles to Moscow will be less than 35 minutes; ballistic missiles from Kharkov will take seven to eight minutes; and hypersonic assault weapons, four to five minutes. It is like a knife to the throat. I have no doubt that they hope to carry out these plans, as they did many times in the past, expanding NATO eastward, moving their military infrastructure to Russian borders and fully ignoring our concerns, protests and warnings. Excuse me, but they simply did not care at all about such things and did whatever they deemed necessary.

Of course, they are going to behave in the same way in the future, following a well-known proverb: “The dogs bark but the caravan goes on.” Let me say right away – we do not accept this behaviour and will never accept it. That said, Russia has always advocated the resolution of the most complicated problems by political and diplomatic means, at the negotiating table.

We are well aware of our enormous responsibility when it comes to regional and global stability. Back in 2008, Russia put forth an initiative to conclude a European Security Treaty under which not a single Euro-Atlantic state or international organisation could strengthen their security at the expense of the security of others. However, our proposal was rejected right off the bat on the pretext that Russia should not be allowed to put limits on NATO activities.

Furthermore, it was made explicitly clear to us that only NATO members can have legally binding security guarantees.

Last December, we handed over to our Western partners a draft treaty between the Russian Federation and the United States of America on security guarantees, as well as a draft agreement on measures to ensure the security of the Russian Federation and NATO member states.

The United States and NATO responded with general statements. There were kernels of rationality in them as well, but they concerned matters of secondary importance and it all looked like an attempt to drag the issue out and to lead the discussion astray.

We responded to this accordingly and pointed out that we were ready to follow the path of negotiations, provided, however, that all issues are considered as a package that includes Russia’s core proposals which contain three key points. First, to prevent further NATO expansion. Second, to have the Alliance refrain from deploying assault weapon systems on Russian borders. And finally, rolling back the bloc's military capability and infrastructure in Europe to where they were in 1997, when the NATO-Russia Founding Act was signed.

These principled proposals of ours have been ignored. To reiterate, our Western partners have once again vocalised the all-too-familiar formulas that each state is entitled to freely choose ways to ensure its security or to join any military union or alliance. That is, nothing has changed in their stance, and we keep hearing the same old references to NATO’s notorious “open door” policy. Moreover, they are again trying to blackmail us and are threatening us with sanctions, which, by the way, they will introduce no matter what as Russia continues to strengthen its sovereignty and its Armed Forces. To be sure, they will never think twice before coming up with or just fabricating a pretext for yet another sanction attack regardless of the developments in Ukraine. Their one and only goal is to hold back the development of Russia. And they will keep doing so, just as they did before, even without any formal pretext just because we exist and will never compromise our sovereignty, national interests or values.

I would like to be clear and straightforward: in the current circumstances, when our proposals for an equal dialogue on fundamental issues have actually remained unanswered by the United States and NATO, when the level of threats to our country has increased significantly, Russia has every right to respond in order to ensure its security. That is exactly what we will do.

With regard to the state of affairs in Donbass, we see that the ruling Kiev elites never stop publicly making clear their unwillingness to comply with the Minsk Package of Measures to settle the conflict and are not interested in a peaceful settlement. On the contrary, they are trying to orchestrate a blitzkrieg in Donbass as was the case in 2014 and 2015. We all know how these reckless schemes ended.

Not a single day goes by without Donbass communities coming under shelling attacks. The recently formed large military force makes use of attack drones, heavy equipment, missiles, artillery and multiple rocket launchers. The killing of civilians, the blockade, the abuse of people, including children, women and the elderly, continues unabated. As we say, there is no end in sight to this.

Meanwhile, the so-called civilised world, which our Western colleagues proclaimed themselves the only representatives of, prefers not to see this, as if this horror and genocide, which almost 4 million people are facing, do not exist. But they do exist and only because these people did not agree with the West-supported coup in Ukraine in 2014 and opposed the transition towards the Neanderthal and aggressive nationalism and neo-Nazism which have been elevated in Ukraine to the rank of national policy. They are fighting for their elementary right to live on their own land, to speak their own language, and to preserve their culture and traditions.

How long can this tragedy continue? How much longer can one put up with this? Russia has done everything to preserve Ukraine’s territorial integrity. All these years, it has persistently and patiently pushed for the implementation of UN Security Council Resolution 2202 of February 17, 2015, which consolidated the Minsk Package of Measures of February 12, 2015, to settle the situation in Donbass.

Everything was in vain. Presidents and Rada deputies come and go, but deep down the aggressive and nationalistic regime that seized power in Kiev remains unchanged. It is entirely a product of the 2014 coup, and those who then embarked on the path of violence, bloodshed and lawlessness did not recognise then and do not recognise now any solution to the Donbass issue other than a military one.

In this regard, I consider it necessary to take a long overdue decision and to immediately recognise the independence and sovereignty of the Donetsk People's Republic and the Lugansk People's Republic.

I would like to ask the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation to support this decision and then ratify the Treaty of Friendship and Mutual Assistance with both republics. These two documents will be prepared and signed shortly.

We want those who seized and continue to hold power in Kiev to immediately stop hostilities. Otherwise, the responsibility for the possible continuation of the bloodshed will lie entirely on the conscience of Ukraine’s ruling regime.

As I announce the decisions taken today, I remain confident in the support of Russia’s citizens and the country’s patriotic forces.

Thank you.



////



News conference following Russian-Belarusian talks
Event_Date: 18/2/2022
Event_Time: 17:00
Event_Place: The_Kremlin_Moscow


Mr President, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen,

First of all, I would like to express my gratitude to the President of the Republic of Belarus for accepting my invitation and coming to Moscow today.

We understand that the President has a very busy schedule right now, in connection with the necessary preparations for an important domestic event: the upcoming nationwide referendum of the new version of the Belarusian Constitution on February 27. Of course, we wish our Belarusian friends success in holding it.

Let me note that our talks today were held in a constructive, business-like and friendly atmosphere, like we have had for many, many years.

As both sides have stressed many times, Russia and Belarus are good neighbours, close allies and strategic partners. We are deeply connected by a common history, moral values and family ties. Diverse bilateral cooperation is always built on the principles of mutual respect, support and consideration of each other’s interests.

Of course, we have always paid and will pay special attention to the expansion of trade and economic ties. Despite the coronavirus-related difficulties, trade is growing: it increased by more than a third in 2021, or 34.4 percent, and amounted to a significant amount of US$38.5 billion.

Almost half of all products manufactured in Belarus are exported to Russia, and Russia is a leading investor in the real sector of the Belarusian economy. Russian investment accounts for about 30 percent of total foreign investment in Belarus. And we will certainly try to create even more comfortable conditions for the business communities of the two countries and encourage entrepreneurial initiatives.

Of course, matters related to building the Union State and promoting integration within it were among the central topics in our talks with the President of Belarus.

We carefully studied the progress of implementing the strategic decisions approved at the November 4, 2021, meeting of the Union State Supreme State Council. We also discussed efforts to implement the 28 sectoral programmes of the Union and in general the provisions of the Treaty Establishing the Union State. During the talks, we noted that the 28 programmes we are talking about build on our long-standing cooperation and integration efforts in the relevant fields.

Both sides noted that relevant agencies of Russia and Belarus have been working together effectively on promoting integration across the board. The high-level group for coordinating our integration cooperation has been gathering momentum. It held a regular meeting in mid-December.

Our respective governments have also maintained close contact. Let me remind you that our prime ministers held eight meetings last year. In fact, they remain in touch constantly, almost on a weekly basis, if necessary.

Of course, Mr Lukashenko and I keep the implementation of integration-related process under our personal control. We can outline several areas where we have achieved tangible progress recently.

In particular, in the transport and logistics sector there was a significant increase in transits of Belarusian exports in many categories across Russian territory to third countries. We will continue our consistent efforts to build a common freight and passenger market within the Union State.

In the lending and financial sector, we have been cooperating to overcome and minimise the consequences of illegitimate sanctions imposed by some countries with a view to worsening the socioeconomic situation in our countries.

In addition, we have been working on integrating our payment systems and creating a new payment framework, as well as harmonising tax, customs, and labour laws of the two countries, and unifying our markets in the gas, oil, petrochemical, and electric power sectors.

I would like to note that our joint efforts to implement the economic agenda of the Union State are ultimately designed to ensure economic growth and to improve the living standards of our people.

Our other major integration projects have the same goals. I am referring to the Eurasian Economic Union, in the framework of which we are creating a truly common Eurasian market for goods, services, capital and workforce. It is important that all EAEU member states feel the practical effects of these processes.

During our talks today we had an in-depth discussion on strengthening the common defence space of Russia and Belarus. We have agreed to continue taking the necessary collective measures to ensure the security of our two states in light of the growing military activity of the NATO states on the external border of the Union State.

In this context, we praised the Allied Resolve 2022 military exercises, the active phase of which will run until February 20 in Belarus. I would like to point out that these exercises are purely defensive and do not threaten anyone. As you know, the defence ministries of our two states in due time announced the essence and goals of these planned – I would like to emphasise this – planned manoeuvres. As the President of Belarus, who attended them, said today, many foreign representatives and military attachés are attending the exercises and can see the whole thing with their own eyes.

Responding to a request from President Lukashenko, I talked about my recent meetings with foreign leaders on the provision by the US and NATO of long-term and legally binding security guarantees for Russia. We believe it is both logical and understandable that this issue also concerns our Belarussian allies.

We discussed the situation with Russia’s requests for the West, the most important of which concern NATO’s non-expansion, the non-deployment of strike weapons systems in close proximity to the Russian border, and the return of the bloc’s military potential and infrastructure in Europe to the state of 1997 when the Russia-NATO Founding Act was signed.

As I said earlier, unfortunately, the United States and other members of the alliance do not appear ready to sincerely consider these three pivotal elements of our initiative. At the same time, they have advanced a number of ideas of their own concerning European security, specifically, intermediate-range and shorter-range missiles, and military transparency, which Russia is open to discussing. We are ready to continue the negotiation track provided that all items are considered in their entirety, in conjunction with Russia’s main proposals, which are an unconditional priority for us.

President Lukashenko and I touched on the intra-Ukrainian conflict as well. The settlement process remains stalled; despite all our efforts, neither the contacts at the level of advisers to the leaders of the Normandy Format countries nor the consultations with our partners are helping.

Kiev is not complying with the Minsk Agreements and, in particular, is strongly opposed to a direct dialogue with Donetsk and Lugansk. Kiev is essentially sabotaging the agreements on amending the Constitution, on the special status of Donbass, on local elections and on amnesty – on all the key items in the Minsk Agreements. Besides, basically, human rights are massively and systematically violated in Ukraine, and discrimination against the Russian-speaking population is being fixed at the legislative level.

The President of Belarus and I agreed that the Minsk Agreements are the key to restoring civil peace in Ukraine and relieving tension around that country. All Kiev needs to do is sit down at the negotiating table with representatives of Donbass and agree on political, military, economic and humanitarian measures to end the conflict. The sooner this happens, the better. Unfortunately, right now, we are witnessing the opposite – the situation in Donbass is worsening.

In conclusion, I would like to express my gratitude to Mr Lukashenko for our productive cooperation. I am confident that today’s talks will serve to further strengthen the entire scope of allied relations between Russia and Belarus. Tomorrow, as we agreed, we will take part in several regular events related to our joint military activities.

Go ahead please, Mr President.

President of the Republic of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko: Friends,

Our meeting with President Putin is taking place against the backdrop of an unprecedented escalation of military-political tensions in the world, as the President just said.

Considering the urgency of the situation, the President and I have devoted much attention today to this issue and discussed potential joint actions as a response to the aggressive behaviour of our Western partners. I would like to emphasise once again: nobody wants a war, or even an aggravation of the situation or any conflict. We, Russians and Belarusians, do not need this.

As people well versed in this issue, you probably understand that this no longer depends even on our neighbours, including Ukraine. You also see clearly who the escalation of tensions near our borders depends on. For the first time in decades, we have found ourselves on the threshold of a conflict that could, unfortunately, pull much of the entire continent into a maelstrom.

We are seeing the irresponsibility and, excuse me for being blunt, stupidity of some Western politicians at its best. There is no logic or reasonable explanation for the conduct of the leaders of neighbouring countries, their truly morbid desire to walk the edge.

The President of Russia has very mildly described the aggravation of the situation in Donbass. Unfortunately, it is true. People there are ready to flee the area and are probably already fleeing, as we know. This is not normal. I have the impression that some politicians who hold high and responsible positions in the so-called free world are simply pathologically dangerous to both their associates and, most importantly, to their own people.

As you heard, Union Resolve 2022, Belarusian-Russian joint military exercises, will end in a few days. Tomorrow, Mr Putin and I will hold joint events in the Russian Federation, about which the media will be informed.

As for the 2022 exercises that are nearing completion, I explained the basic point of this. The President just talked about it: given the growing military threat on our borders and the pumping of Ukraine with weapons, Belarus and Russia are compelled to look for adequate means of repelling a potential attack on their borders, including on our borders, the southern borders for Belarus. There is nothing surprising about this, we are looking at these borders in the south of Belarus – they are almost 1,500 km long. We are concentrating on this to defend ourselves; we are looking for points where we should basically build our defences.

Belarus and the Russian Federation have a common air defence system, a joint regional military force, that is, a joint army, joint training centres, and finally, there is the Military Doctrine of the Union State. We have never hidden these documents or these areas of activity from anyone, everyone knows this.

This is why it was our joint situational decision to hold these exercises. We conduct these exercises as transparently as possible in our own territory; we are not hiding anything from anyone; everything happens in full view of an entire army of attachés and the press.

In talking about foreign policy we have not forgotten the Union State integration process. Four and a half months have passed since the Declaration of the Union State Supreme State Council was signed. It approved the main directions for the implementation of the provisions of the Treaty Establishing the Union State for 2021–2023 as well as the 28 Union State programmes.

These programmes are about 30 percent complete. A lot has been said about what has been done under these programmes and how, as Mr President said just now. In particular, we are focusing on the following areas: taxation, customs cooperation, and establishing a common gas market.

By the way, those who have moved the war of sanctions to the front lines will suffer equally, if not much more. This is a subject that President Putin and I have paid special attention to because this banditry and attempt to impose an economic war on us – it has already broken out – has cost us a lot. Of course, we have already learned how to counter the sanctions; as we have said, we have become stronger, as our bilateral trade shows. Nevertheless, we still have to focus a lot on countering the pressures of the sanctions. We have discussed this in detail.

I am grateful to the President of Russia – to you, Mr Putin – for the instructions you have just passed to the Russian leadership in my presence, without hiding anything. I would like to thank you for this.

It is clear that we, Russians and Belarusians, will survive this hybrid war. We can see how our cooperation has improved in industry; there are dozens of new goods in the structure of our trade; and foreign trade is diversifying. The world is big: you can’t lock all the gates and you can’t block all transport routes.

Another part of our talks was devoted to the economy. It is gratifying that we did so well last year. Despite the pandemic and various virus strains, we increased our trade to almost 40 billion. And this is something to be taken into account, and then exports and imports between people – there are no borders between Belarus and Russia – this is billions of dollars too. It is important that both the Belarusian and Russian economies grew throughout the year in terms of gross domestic product, industrial production, and in many other areas of the real sector of the economy.

Of course, we talked more about problem areas not about our successes. There are fewer of them, but they still exist. We discussed measures to support the economy, strengthen financial stability, increase business activity, and develop cooperation.

Naturally, I informed the President of Russia of how Belarus is preparing for the most important political event – the constitutional referendum. We will hold it with dignity, in the interests of the Belarusian people, and this will in no way contradict our relations with brotherly Russia.

The West is actively trying if not to destabilise then to at least aggravate the situation in the country with the help of our defectors. However, they have no illusions that the events of August 2020 will be repeated. This is important because it strengthens our confidence that together we will be able to overcome the most difficult situations, confront any challenge or threat and build a common future. And no one should expect us to back down from any difficulty, challenge or problem.

Let me repeat what I just said: we do not want war, but if someone refuses to be still, our response will be asymmetric. Anyone in the world can understand this. And in this situation, in protecting the security of our peoples in our states, we will act appropriately.

The President of Russia noted, and I absolutely agree with him: they are trying to tear us apart, to separate us, not only Russia and Belarus, but all those states that are set on unity. This is the wrong approach: it will never work. Kazakhstan is evidence of this. We appreciate that.

Thank you for your attention.



////



Meeting on economic issues
Event_Date: 17/2/2022
Event_Time: 18:20
Event_Place: The_Kremlin_Moscow


Colleagues, good afternoon.

We are starting a series of meetings to prepare this year’s Address to the Federal Assembly. This is a large, complex and substantive job, which needs to take into account a number of important aspects. This is a team project of course, because although the President is the one who announces the decisions we have prepared, says what needs to be done and how to achieve our goals, it is our joint task.

I suggest we begin by analysing the overall macroeconomic picture and consider an updated economic forecast for the next three years. We will discuss their impact on the implementation of current government projects and programmes, as well as on the launch of new initiatives.

I must say that the Russian economy fared well last year amid the difficult global situation. According to the Ministry of Economic Development, the country's GDP grew by 4.6 percent, which means the national economy not just fully compensated for the 2020 decline, but exceeded the pre-crisis level.

Unlike many other leading economies, Russia has normalised its budgetary policy. Last year, the federal budget ended with a surplus equal to 0.4 percent of GDP. As a reminder, a year earlier, we ran a 3.8 percent deficit.

The country’s non-oil and gas revenues amounted to 16.2 trillion rubles last year. Fourth quarter revenue exceeded the forecast the Government had enclosed with the federal budget law by more than 20 percent. This positive trend has continued into this year: in January, non-oil and gas revenues were 27 percent higher than a year earlier.

Let me emphasise that with steady revenues, we will be able to address current problems and meet targets, as well as take new, additional measures to develop the economy and infrastructure, to strengthen the social sphere and support Russian families.

At the same time, it is important that budget planning be systematic. We need to continue to apply the budget rule – I am making a point of saying this to emphasise – to ensure a balance of public finances and the stability of key macroeconomic indicators.

I would like to specifically point out that inflation has recently become a serious challenge for most countries. In Russia, consumer prices accelerated by 8.7 percent year-on-year in January, which is noticeably above the target. However, the situation in the so-called developed market economies is not much better either. For comparison, in the United States, inflation reached 7.5 percent in January, much higher than market expectations, and in the eurozone, 5.1 percent from a year ago. This is a serious challenge for those countries.

Nevertheless, we need to take effective measures to reduce inflation in our country. Both the Government and the Central Bank should certainly play a significant role here, with the latter maintaining a responsible approach to the implementation of its monetary policy.

It is important to coordinate the efforts of the Central Bank and the Government and do so, of course, with due regard for the Central Bank’s statutory authority and the effect this might have on business and investment activities; these joint efforts should further the objective of removing external and internal factors behind inflation.

Rising prices primarily eat into people’s income, having an adverse effect on families’ well-being. Due to additional budget revenue, we have taken a decision to provide targeted support to the most vulnerable among us. We have made one-time payments to pensioners and families with schoolchildren and have additionally adjusted pensions, the minimum wage and the subsistence rate to account for inflation. We have adjusted maternal capital to reflect the real inflation rate.

I would like to remind you that this year people’s real disposable income is expected to increase by at least 2.5 percent. This is a benchmark set for the Government and this objective must be achieved without fail.

In this connection I would like to note that rising incomes should be ensured not only by effective social support measures but primarily, of course, by economic growth, as you and I both know. This is a key condition for achieving objectives in the social sphere.

It is important to assess the situation objectively. Clearly, last year’s positive economic dynamics can largely be described as recovery and experts say that the potential for growth of this kind has been fully tapped. Under these new circumstances it is important to ensure sustainable long-term development to boost, so to speak, the potential growth rate of the Russian economy. The Government has been assigned this task and today we will talk about progress in accomplishing it.

I would like to emphasise that we need to ensure broad-based development in all sectors of the economy and in each region of the country, which has to produce tangible results: improved well-being of the people and better quality of life all round, including the state of the urban environment, the environment in general, education and healthcare. In this context, I would also like to specially mention the objective of making quality healthcare services accessible everywhere in the country.

We will soon discuss likely supplemental decisions on this and other matters at our next meetings.

Now let us move on to our agenda. I would like to give the floor to Minister of Economic Development Maxim Reshetnikov.

<…>

Vladimir Putin: Let us sum things up and conclude our meeting today.

As I have said, today we have our first meeting as part of drafting the Address to the Federal Assembly.

What would I like to add to this? The Address to the Federal Assembly is not just a speech delivered by the head of state for the entire country, for the nation, promising some bonuses, additional benefits and solutions to social problems in the broader sense of the word. We will have to show the direction in which the country’s development is headed, as well as its economy, and the basis for addressing the main task: improving the well-being of our citizens, which is the most important thing.

In this context, I would like to elaborate on a few things.

First, it is obvious that a certain amount of time has to pass between the decision to launch a project and its actual implementation, as Mr Mishustin just said, as well as his colleagues during our discussion today. Of course, timely decision-making is necessary, or we will not launch some projects at all or never see them completed. The example from the sphere of infrastructure was right and fair: it may take a year, or two, or five, seven, even ten, depending on the project. And we have some grand projects designed to take many years.

We have to carry out the preparations in advance, of course, so that we will not find ourselves in a situation where funding is allocated on an emergency basis, which leads to the outcome mentioned by the Governor of the Central Bank. We saw a lot of examples at the end of last year, which Ms Nabiullina has mentioned. Let me repeat that we must avoid such situations.

This brings me to my second point: precision and objectivity in forecasting the revenue portion of the federal budget is the ultimate priority. It is hard to disagree with the Ministry of Finance. I see that there are a lot of factors creating uncertainty and it is difficult to foresee everything. But still, it is necessary to take prompt and timely action to make certain necessary, correct, and justified adjustments. This is required to make informed, systemic decisions.

I would like once again to use an example from last year, when just three months before its end, in September, the amount of oil and gas revenue was being projected. By the way, we can return the ball to the Ministry of Finance here. At the end of the year, actual receipts turned out to be significantly higher, by a full trillion rubles.

Thirdly, it is important for us, of course, to maintain a conservative approach to state finances. What do I mean? We will continue to observe the budget rule which ensures the balanced growth of government spending. But let me repeat: of course, the budget rule must be followed systematically, based on objective estimates of expected revenue.

Let me remind you here that last September we agreed that the practical implementation of the budget will correspond to the goals we set. This will make the situation more predictable for the Central Bank.

Now regarding the proposal of the Economic Development Ministry for a new and better defined procedure for adding funds to the Government’s Reserve Fund. I understand there is definitely a logic to introducing it; our colleagues have said as much. But let us agree with the Finance Ministry for the time being: we will not do this hastily right now – rather, we will see how it can work and, during our subsequent discussions, we will see if this move is justified and if this needs to be done at all, all the more so as the Finance Ministry believes that existing mechanisms suffice.

Now regarding the evaluation of additional revenue. Some of our colleagues say that a trillion rubles can be allocated for this purpose – some quote a slightly higher figure, others a lower one. They say the budget will receive 1.4–1.5 trillion rubles in additional revenue, the Finance Ministry says it will be one trillion and, accordingly, is guided by this figure in calculating the amount that we will have to allocate in one way or another in order to meet our social obligations – growing social obligations due to changes in the economic situation in our country and around the world.

These are questions that we, of course, have to consider before taking a final decision. I will repeat that this is our first effort. I know you have planned to continue this work in the Government. I ask you to coordinate your efforts and think through all potential risks and scenarios of how the situation may evolve.

But, of course, I have to agree with what my colleagues said: in the social sphere, we always need to be thinking about solutions and moving towards resolving one of the most important issues, I mean, of course, fighting poverty. As for economic development in general, of course, attention needs to be given to infrastructure projects, which have always been important and are even more important in the current circumstances. Mr Mishustin is absolutely right about this and it is important to not miss the right moment for taking a decision.

I would like to thank you. Even before our next meeting – it is scheduled for next week, if I am not mistaken – I will talk, in the regular course of work, with the Prime Minister in private, so to say, and with some of my colleagues from the Finance Ministry, the Ministry of Economic Development and the Central Bank. I would like to ask each of you, after the discussions you have and I will stay in touch with you in one way or another – to present your viewpoint to me as well before the next meeting. Thank you for the work done today.

All the best to you.



////



Expanded meeting of Emergencies Ministry Board
Event_Date: 16/2/2022
Event_Time: 18:50
Event_Place: The_Kremlin_Moscow

Comrades, good afternoon.

We have always paid serious attention to the activities of the Ministry of Emergencies and will continue to do so. Today, at the annual expanded meeting of the Ministry Board, we will discuss your performance in 2021 and outline priority tasks for the future.

Let me note that over the last three decades the Ministry has proven in practice that it is an essential and highly needed link in Russia’s security system. It has become a flawless, mobile, and well-equipped organisation responsible for protecting our citizens in emergencies, as well as preventing and extinguishing fires and developing the civil defence system.

Last year was difficult for the ministry. Floods in Siberia, in the Far East and in the south of Russia were an important test for rescue crews. They fought natural and man-made fires that threatened people and property.

A major effort was carried out in response to the Listvyazhnaya Mine accident. This tragedy, which unfortunately killed several people – miners and rescuers – was the pain and misfortune of Kuzbass and the rest of Russia.

And, of course, our people are grateful for the substantive aid you have provided in countering the coronavirus. Since the beginning of the pandemic, the ministry’s experts have disinfected more than 40,000 social institutions and decontaminated over 46,000 transport infrastructure facilities, along with almost 12,000 kilometres of roads.

You also fulfilled an important mission abroad during these difficult months. During the general lockdown when the borders were closed, Emergency Ministry planes helped evacuate Russians who were abroad on business trips or holidays. Over 1,400 tonnes of medical equipment and medicines, 120 tonnes of food and over 380,000 doses of Sputnik V and Sputnik Light vaccines were delivered to the countries that suffered most from the coronavirus.

I would like to thank the managers, the military personnel, the employees and civilian specialists at the Emergencies Ministry for their dutiful work and their courage and selflessness in performing their duties, for their readiness to immediately help others, often at the risk of their own lives.

Colleagues,

To be clear, the demands on your work are always the toughest. Today, Emergencies Ministry forces and equipment, and your territorial units must respond more efficiently to all possible emergencies. To do so, operational, analytical and personnel capabilities must be built up and the ministry must be provided with the latest equipment. This must be done in a systemic and consistent way, in full conformity with existing plans.

I will note that that last year a programme was approved for the first time to re-equip the Emergencies Ministry with modern types and models of firefighting and aviation equipment. This has been on the agenda for a long time. Significant funding amounting to almost 190 billion rubles is being allocated for the programme until 2030.

It is especially important to upgrade firefighting and rescue units, to increase their mobility and readiness to immediately respond to natural and industrial threats. As such, I think it is necessary to focus on resolving the following priority tasks.

First, we need to supply the Emergencies Ministry with modern vehicles and equipment. By 2030 new rescue equipment must make up at least 81 percent and fire engines at least 56 percent.

In view of the history of cooperation with the largest manufacturers of this equipment, primarily KamAZ and Ural, the issue of signing long-term contracts must be considered while ensuring transparent pricing, cutting delivery time and streamlining servicing by signing “life-cycle” contracts.

Special care should be taken to improve the gear and equipment for firefighters and rescuers, reflecting the local climate and other peculiarities, which are different in different regions due to the huge size of the country.

In addition, training equipment for Emergencies Ministry personnel must be improved, primarily for mine-rescuers.

With this in mind, I will note that this year, which marks the centenary of the mine rescue service in Russia, the core facilities of the National Airmobile Rescue Training Centre for mine-rescuers and miners must begin operating. It is a crucial task, so please note that up-to-date training that meets all standards is utterly important for operating with efficiency in case of an emergency.

Now, about the second aspect – organisation. The ministry’s efficiency gains will largely come from eliminating duplicate structures, mainly in management and supply divisions. The resources freed up should be diverted to operational rescue and fire services and units, and also to increase the number of inspectors in supervising bodies.

Third. Preventing man-made fires remains a priority. They are a grave threat to people’s health and lives and are associated with large economic losses.

Yes, the state is consistently removing the inspection burden on businesses, and this is the right thing to do, especially for small and medium-sized businesses. The Emergencies Ministry was among the first to assume a risk-based approach to inspection activities. However, it does not mean that if companies are not inspected in the old way, they can ignore established rules and standards, much less blatantly violate them. Responsibility for fire safety and people’s health has to be of the utmost importance.

I must add that the Emergencies Ministry has to get more involved with public volunteer associations and volunteers while addressing these issues. This concerns not only firefighting or emergency relief operations but also prevention work including teaching citizens safe habits.

Volunteer firefighting teams and units and other associations are a great help in your work, and so we need to consider the issue of transferring retired but otherwise fully functioning equipment of the Emergencies Ministry to volunteer firefighting units. I want to stress: not faulty, retired but fully functioning, otherwise it makes no sense. Salvage and unwanted equipment cannot be just dumped on people who will not be able to use it. Instead, it would only be a hazard.

Fourth – the development of the emergencies and rescue infrastructure in the Arctic region. Significant federal funding is to be allocated to address this task. For example, providing the Emergencies Ministry with latest Arctic-type helicopters will cost over 18 billion rubles.

In 2021, the formation of a rescue centre in Pevek, Chukotka Autonomous Area began; it was scheduled to begin and is reported to have already begun. However, note that this work requires more interaction with large companies that have hydrocarbon extraction and processing facilities in the Arctic such as Novatek and Rosneft. All that will allow for more efficient use of budget funds.

And, finally, fifth. The ongoing work on increasing the efficiency of the civil defence system must be continued.

The state, for its part, will continue to further enhance social guarantees for those employed by the Ministry. Over a thousand of the Ministry’s employees have been provided with housing in the past three years. Allowances for service personnel and employee wages were duly adjusted. I know that some problems remain here, but this work will continue, obviously.

I am confident that Emergencies Ministry personnel will act professionally and decisively to address the issues raised today and other challenges facing the Ministry.

I wish you success in your work for the good of Russia and our citizens.

Thank you.



////



Press statements following Russian-Brazilian talks
Event_Date: 16/2/2022
Event_Time: 17:10
Event_Place: The_Kremlin_Moscow


Mr President, colleagues,

I would like to begin by thanking the President of the Federative Republic of Brazil, Mr Jair Bolsonaro for accepting my invitation to come to Russia on an official visit. This is the President’s first visit to Russia.

Let me note that relations between Russia and Brazil have traditionally been based on friendship and understanding. The strategic partnership between the two countries includes many diverse areas. Together, we want to develop political, economic and cultural ties, and cooperate closely on the global stage, at the UN, in BRICS, and in the G20, among others.

And today we have had quite substantive and constructive talks. Following the talks, we adopted a joint statement that sets the guidelines for the further development of Russian-Brazilian cooperation.

Our countries are definitely interested in progressively expanding economic interaction. Brazil is one of Russia’s leading trade partners in Latin America and the Caribbean, accounting for one third of all our trade with this region.

Last year, bilateral trade grew by 87 percent despite coronavirus-related complications. The intergovernmental commission plays an important role in strengthening bilateral trade and investment ties. The latest session was held in autumn of last year in Brasilia. At that time, under personal instructions from President Bolsonaro, key Brazilian government ministers in the economic sector, responsible for energy, the mining industry and agriculture, visited Russia.

In addition, we plan to soon hold a meeting of the High-Level Russian-Brazilian Commission co-chaired by the Russian Prime Minister and the Brazilian Vice President.

The Russian-Brazilian and Brazilian-Russian Councils of Entrepreneurs are working well together; they have timed a series of meetings of business representatives to the current visit by the President of Brazil, and tonight Mr Bolsonaro will speak with the business leaders on these councils.

Let me emphasise that Brazil is always widely represented at the St Petersburg International Economic Forum. Last year, Mr Bolsonaro greeted the participants of the SPIEF plenary session via videoconference, which we highly appreciated. Once again, I would like to thank you, Mr President, for your attention to our event in St Petersburg.

We expect that this year’s 25th forum, scheduled for June 15–18, will be attended by a high-profile delegation of Brazilian politicians, business leaders and public activists.

We note with satisfaction that our bilateral industrial cooperation is successfully expanding. And I would like to highlight the projects involving the Russian corporation Power Machines to modernise the Brazilian hydropower industry, as well as the Severstal and AVISMA projects to supply components for Brazilian high-tech industries.

Russia’s Rosatom exports fuel for Brazilian nuclear power plants and radioisotopes for medical purposes. Rosatom is also interested in participating in the construction of new power units in Brazil, including low-capacity nuclear power plants, both land and floating plants, because it has unique and extensive experience, and technologies that are not available elsewhere in the world.

Cooperation in the chemical industry and the production of environmentally friendly mineral fertiliser is progressing at a good pace. In 2021, Russian companies supplied almost 10 million tonnes of fertilisers worth about $3.5 billion to the Brazilian market.

Roscosmos and the Brazilian Space Agency are working on the implementation of the agreement on cooperation on the BRICS Remote Sensing Satellite Constellation. Three GLONASS stations have already been built in Brazil, as well as an electronic optical orbital debris spotter, and there are agreements to deploy two additional stations.

Russian-Brazilian cooperation in medicine and pharmaceuticals has been gaining momentum of late. Our companies ChemRar and BIOCAD are active in promoting coronavirus and cancer drugs in the Brazilian market. A project to localise Sputnik V vaccine manufacturing in Brazil is being implemented with support from the Russian Direct Investment Fund.

During our talks with President Bolsonaro, we naturally discussed the issues of cultural interaction. We agreed to continue promoting bilateral education, cultural and sports exchanges.

For example, a range of initiatives are being worked out now for Russia to participate in the celebrations of the bicentenary of Brazil’s independence later this year.

I will also mention that Russia provides assistance to Brazil in personnel training. We have about 400 Brazilian students in Russia, about 80 of whom are studying tuition-free.

A Russian-Brazilian inter-cultural school has recently been opened in Rio de Janeiro where classes are taught in Russian and Portuguese. You may also recall that a Bolshoi Theatre school has been operating for over 20 years in the Brazilian city of Joinville. Over 250 young people from different areas of Brazil and other Latin American countries train at this unique school, the only one of its kind outside Russia.

While sharing opinions on regional and global issues, the parties stated that Russia’s and Brazil’s positions on many issues are close or overlap. The foreign and defence ministries maintain contact. Actually, the foreign and defence ministers of the two countries had their first ever meeting in the 2+2 format in Moscow this morning.

Our countries advocate the development of a multipolar world order based on international law with the central coordinating role of the UN. Given that, we are firmly committed to the principle of multilateralism and the political-diplomatic settlement of conflicts.

In view of Brazil’s status as a non-permanent member of the UN Security Council in 2022–2023, we are set to pursue our interaction more intensively across all current issues on the UN agenda.

And we will, of course, continue to cooperate with our Brazilin partners within BRICS – a respected international association that holds an important place in the contemporary multipolar world and plays an important role in the global economy.

To conclude, I would like to thank Mr Bolsonaro for our meeting. I believe that today’s talks will serve to further strengthen Russian-Brazilian relations to the benefit of our two peoples.

And finally, Mr President, I know of yesterday’s disaster in Brazil: heavy rains caused destruction and claimed lives. I want to express my condolences to you and to all the people of Brazil over this tragedy and to wish a speedy recovery to the injured.

Thank you for your attention.



////



News conference following Russian-German talks
Event_Date: 15/2/2022
Event_Time: 17:50
Event_Place: The_Kremlin_Moscow


Mr Federal Chancellor, ladies and gentlemen,

It is a pleasure to welcome the Federal Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany in the Kremlin.

Mr Scholz is visiting Russia for the first time as head of the German government. However, during his tenure as the First Mayor of Hamburg, he, in particular, largely contributed to the development of sister city partnership with St Petersburg. This year in fact marks the 65th anniversary of those ties.

During today's talks, which took place in a business-like atmosphere, we substantively and thoroughly discussed various aspects of bilateral relations and prospects for their development. We also focused on the most pressing items on the international agenda.

I have mentioned more than once that Germany is one of Russia's key partners. We have always strived to strengthen interaction between our states.

We have the impression that the Federal Chancellor, too, is interested in further pragmatic and mutually beneficial cooperation with Russia.

This applies primarily to economic ties, which are as intensive as ever. Germany is Russia’s second biggest foreign trading partner after China. Despite the difficulties caused by the coronavirus pandemic and volatility in global markets, by the end of 2021, mutual trade grew by 36 percent and reached almost US$57 billion. German investment in the Russian economy exceeds US$21 billion, while Russian investment in Germany amounts to US$10 billion. About 4,000 companies co-owned by German investors are operating in Russia.

We regularly meet with the management of major German companies. I can say that these meetings will certainly continue; they are extremely important for taking into account our German partners’ opinion, in order to create a suitable atmosphere, a business atmosphere in the Russian market. This is very useful for us because entrepreneurs often make constructive proposals for improving the general business and investment climate in Russia. We heed many of these proposals, develop them and put them into practice.

Energy is an important part of bilateral economic cooperation. As early as the 1970s our countries successfully implemented their landmark gas-for-pipes project. Since then, Russia has reliably supplied gas to Germany and other European countries.

Today, Russia provides over a third of Germany’s energy needs – both oil (34 percent) and natural gas (35 or even 35.4 percent). In 2021, Germany received 50.7 billion cubic metres of Russian gas.

I would like to note that even during the high exchange quotes for gas and the shortage in Europe, we have continued to deliver fuel to German customers for the prices in our long-term contracts.

As you know, the national regulator of the Federal Republic is charged with certifying the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline, which has technically been complete since last December. This is one of Europe’s largest infrastructure projects. It is designed to substantially enhance energy security in Europe and facilitate the resolution of pan-European economic and environmental goals. As I have said on many occasions, this is strictly a commercial project without any hint of politics.

I would also like to note that we are ready to continue distributing gas through Ukraine even after 2024 when the current contract for the transit of Russian gas through Ukraine expires. Naturally, we will do this if there is demand from European importers, if it is profitable and if Ukraine’s gas transport system is in proper technical shape.

We see many prospects for expanding Russian-German cooperation in other energy areas, including the development, commercialisation and use of renewable energy sources. We have talked about this as regards hydrogen.

A bilateral working group on sustainable energy is already holding a dialogue on all these issues.

We are also interested in closer cooperation with our German partners on issues of preserving the climate. Russia has suggested several areas for cooperation in this respect. I would like to mention the development of methods to monitor the emission and absorption of substances that have a direct impact on climate change; improvement of technology for reducing carbon dioxide and methane emissions; and the large-scale introduction of hydrogen that I mentioned as a “green fuel.”

We also discussed the humanitarian agenda. We have a genuine mutual interest in the further development of bilateral scientific, educational and cultural exchanges. The Petersburg Dialogue Russian-German public forum will certainly play a role here.

Of course, we have exchanged, with complete frankness, our views on the situation with Russia’s initiatives and proposals to the United States and NATO regarding the provision of long-term legally binding security guarantees for Russia.

We also talked about the main demands, the most important ones being to preclude any further eastward expansion by NATO, to refrain from deploying strike weapons near Russian borders, and to take NATO’s military potential and infrastructure in Europe back to its 1997 configuration, the year the Russia-NATO Founding Act was signed.

Russia cannot turn a blind eye to the United States and the North Atlantic Alliance interpreting the key principles of equal and indivisible security, as enshrined in many pan-European documents, so loosely as to suit their own interests. Let me remind you that equal and indivisible security spans more than the right to freely choose methods of ensuring one's security and entering into military alliances and blocs, which our colleagues keep reiterating; it also refers to a commitment to not strengthen one's own security at the expense of other states.

At the same time, NATO continues to cite its “open door policy.” We know what Article 10 of the North Atlantic Treaty is about, and I have already spoken about this here in this room at previous news conferences following talks with our European partners. Article 10 says nothing of the kind. It says, “the Parties may invite,” not they “must invite.” This is all it says.

We see the forceful containment of Russia as a direct and immediate threat to our national security; legal agreements based on the drafts we have proposed would in fact remove this threat.

I will repeat that in our view US and NATO responses to our proposals on security guarantees do not meet the three fundamental Russian requirements. However, as the Foreign Minister of the Russian Federation reported yesterday, the responses still contain a number of considerations that we are not only ready to discuss but that we have actually suggested to our partners over the years. I am referring to our proposals on European security, certain weapons systems, notably, intermediate and shorter-range missiles, and military transparency. We are ready to continue this joint work. We are also ready to follow the negotiating track, but all issues, as we said before, must be considered in a package, without being separated from Russia’s fundamental proposals, which we consider an unconditional priority.

Naturally, the issue of European security was also discussed in the context of the situation around a settlement of the conflict in Ukraine. As you know, the Kiev authorities are refusing to abide by the Minsk Agreements and the 2015 arrangements, as well as the agreements reached at later summits in the Normandy format, including in Berlin and Paris.

There is no progress on such important issues as constitutional reform, amnesty, local elections or the special legal status of Donbass. So far, Ukraine’s legislature has not confirmed the Frank-Walter Steinmeier Formula, as put forth by Germany’s former foreign minister and current President. He suggested this formula as a compromise for implementing the key points of the Minsk Agreements. Unfortunately, this has not yet been carried out. Opportunities for restoring the country’s territorial integrity via a direct dialogue with Donetsk and Lugansk continue to be ignored, like before. Ukraine is systematically violating human rights on a large scale and continues to endorse discrimination against Russian speakers at the legislative level.

We also reviewed a number of other international issues, including the situation with Iran’s nuclear programme. We are permanently in contact on this issue at the foreign minister level. I will say that our positions are rather close on this issue.

In conclusion, I would like to thank Mr Federal Chancellor for our joint efforts, and a useful and meaningful dialogue.

Thank you for your attention.



////



Meeting of judges of general jurisdiction and arbitration courts
Event_Date: 9/2/2022
Event_Time: 14:25
Event_Place: Novo-Ogaryovo_Moscow_Region


I am delighted to see you.

Good afternoon, colleagues.

I would like to welcome you all to the meeting that you traditionally hold at the start of each year.

I suppose that, as always, many ideas and proposals for discussion have accumulated during the previous period. Certainly, their profound and detailed analysis, a search for essential decisions and their adoption are important for the entire judiciary and, of course, for our society and the entire country. This is because there are no minor issues in your work. All aspects of your activity are directly linked with justice and the protection of citizens’ rights and freedoms, and they have tremendous public and state significance.

This year, we will be marking the 100th anniversary of the establishment of the Supreme Court. I know that work is underway to prepare for this significant date, and that the anniversary celebrations will coincide with the X National Congress of Judges, scheduled for November 2022.

 As the top judicial body, the Supreme Court of Russia performs a large volume of work reviewing numerous court cases, analysing and summing up judicial practice, drafting measures to streamline the judicial system.

This is a continuous process because life goes on, the country develops, and new tasks arise. Suffice it to say that the rapid development of technology creates entire spheres, subject to legal regulation. New tasks and new complex challenges also arise.

For two years now we have been living in the difficult conditions of the spread of the coronavirus infection and the response measures. And, of course, Mr Lebedev, colleagues, in this context I would like to sincerely thank all the judges in Russia for their excellent and sometimes even selfless performance – or better, for fulfilling their mission; and, of course, for working with full dedication, when professional duty comes first and becomes the primary focus.

During this difficult time, our courts have not reduced their activities but worked as usual. I would like to emphasise the special role of the Supreme Court and the Council of Judges presidiums, which promptly adopted resolutions on how the courts would work, at the very beginning of the epidemic, and later regularly provided clarification on issues arising due to the pandemic.

For example, these concerned medical workers, who provided assistance to patients with COVID-19, exercising their right to receive a special payment, or ensuring the rights of people working remotely – there were very specific questions there – among other acute problems that people had to face during this difficult period.

Of course, this is still difficult for many people. And if they go to court they must get a prompt response and a just ruling there.

In this context, let me note that Russian justice remained fully socially-oriented last year, which is reflected in the daily routine of the courts as well as in the decisions and rulings of the Supreme Court. There was a special focus on analysing the consideration of cases related to the protection of children's rights, the rights of citizens in the sphere of labour relations, and consumer rights.

I would like to elaborate on the activities of magistrates. They have to bear a significant load in all kinds of proceedings. For example, last year they considered over 30 million cases. At the same time, as practice shows, the issues related to ensuring the proper operation of their administrations have not been resolved yet. I know that the Supreme Court has a proposal about this. We are talking about legally formalising interaction between the Russian regional authorities and regional councils of judges when determining the structure and staff lists of magistrates.

I believe this proposal deserves support, because similar interaction already takes place when developing draft regional budgets. It focuses the regions’ attention on the need to allocate money to support the work of the magistrates.

Digitalisation of court activities is yet another important topic. It should be noted that the pandemic has accelerated this process, not only in the courts but everywhere, in all sectors and all spheres of life. Last December, a federal law was adopted envisaging remote participation in court sessions, as well as remote examination of case materials, and sending and receiving documents online.

Our judicial system must be completely ready for this broad introduction of advanced technology, both regarding the technical equipment, of course, and, what’s important, ensuring the highest level of legal protection for both individuals and legal entities.

Colleagues, the agenda of your meeting includes a lot of topical issues. I believe that a constructive discussion will help further improve the effectiveness and quality of justice.

I would like to wish you successful and fruitful work.

Once again, thank you for what you have done over the last two years, and last year, too. Thank you for your attention.

<…>

Vladimir Putin: Colleagues, the Supreme Court President presented the country’s extensive judicial activities, which, undeniably, represent a crucial tool that ensures the vital activity of the country, the exercise of rights and freedoms of Russian Federation citizens.

Of course, this work is under the unfaltering watch of the human rights movement, which monitors certain aspects of activity of the courts in the Russian Federation.

In this regard, I would like to say that, first, we are constantly responding to these developments and discussing these issues with the President of the Supreme Court, among other people. At the same time, I would like to point out that, indeed, the judicial system of any country, the Russian Federation in particular, is a formidable machine, a huge mechanism. However, in Russia, it is not a soulless machine, and judging by what the Supreme Court President just reported, the leadership of the Supreme Court, the local judges, and councils of judges remain focused on ways to improve this process.

The Supreme Court President outlined a number of proposals to amend current laws in certain areas. Of course, we will team up with the State Duma deputies and the Federation Council members and, along with the judicial community, we will study and put them into practice based on the proposals made by the President of the Supreme Court, the practical work and judicial practice.

Mr Lebedev, colleagues,

Once again, I would like to thank you for your work and wish you all the best.



////



Meeting of Council for Science and Education
Event_Date: 8/2/2022
Event_Time: 18:10
Event_Place: Novo-Ogaryovo_Moscow_Region


Colleagues, friends, good afternoon.

Today, our scientists, engineers, research equipment specialists, laboratory staff, and so on, are celebrating their professional holiday. They are wonderful people, devoted to their professions. They expand the horizons of knowledge and create a technological foundation for the advancement of our country.

And of course, using this opportunity, I would like to sincerely congratulate you on Russian Science Day, your day, and to emphasise that Russian researchers that are just starting their scientific careers are showing increasingly brilliant and innovative results in the most advanced areas.

In this context, I am pleased to introduce the winners of the prize to young scientists, who traditionally take part in the Council for Science and Education sessions.

This is a biologist from Vladivostok, Alexandra Dubrovina. She has created a new mechanism for improving the properties of agricultural crops and increasing the harvest. Her method is based on natural biological processes and is safe for the environment and for people, which is vital for developing eco-friendly agriculture.

Working in mathematics, physics and biology, researcher from Sevastopol Arseny Kubryakov has created instruments for more precise forecasts of the complicated processes in the world oceans, which have an increasing impact on the planet’s climate every year.

Leonid Skripnikov created a solid theoretical foundation for developing new materials and a quantum computer. Authoritative research teams are already using the precise calculations from this scientist from St Petersburg in conducting the most sophisticated experiments.

I would like to thank our laureates and their research teams – of course, this is always about team work – for their outstanding achievements. I am confident that you and your colleagues from these various fields of knowledge play an active part in implementing our large-scale programmes, which the State Council on Science and Education meeting will focus on today.

Today we will consider the most important innovative projects of federal significance, projects that were announced in last year’s Address to the Federal Assembly. Implementation will begin in the key areas for the development and security of Russia. I will elaborate on each of them.

I would like to start with the most topical and necessary task today: creating firm and reliable defences against new infections. Let me note here that, along with prompt responses, the Government has adopted an entire range of strategic measures to develop new medicines and a system to monitor and prevent biological risks and threats. We need to bring this work to a higher level, to enhance its quality, namely, to establish a strong technological base and infrastructure, so that we can quickly launch the production of effective medicines and vaccines when new and unknown infections and viruses appear. We have discussed this many times with our colleagues from the Government during our regular meetings.

To do this, we must have our own domestically made equipment, components, raw materials, as well as advanced and even unique competencies in the development and use of pharmaceuticals, including new generation medicines, such as those used to treat infections that are resistant to antibiotics, to modern antibiotics as well of course. It is also essential to ensure an up-to-date legal environment in order to organise work in this sensitive area, as well as lift barriers and create favourable conditions for the development of new technologies and their safe use.

Countering negative changes to the climate is the next essential area in science and technology. Its importance goes without saying, it is well known and widely spoken about in the world. Here, we have set specific goals: over the next three decades, the accumulated volume of net greenhouse gas emissions in Russia should be less than in the European Union, and no later than 2060 – this is a consensus arrived at with the Government’s input – Russia must achieve carbon neutrality.

We will have to adapt the entire Russian economy to the changing climate. We do not need to only rely on someone else's calculations in order to consider the possible risks here and coordinate our actions correctly; we need to determine the balance of carbon in the atmosphere ourselves, objectively and accurately. We have already accumulated significant experience. Roshydromet and our leading research institutes are monitoring climate processes and analysing climate data, and they are considered an authoritative source around the world.

However, let me stress that we need a comprehensive, integrated and, of course, reliable mechanism to gather and assess data on Russia’s contribution to the concentration of climate-active gases in the atmosphere. In this context, I believe it necessary to establish a scientific system for high-precision monitoring of emission and absorption of substances that have a direct impact on climate change as part of our innovative programmes. Its purpose will be to collect data on carbon emissions, and most importantly, to correctly assess the ability of our forests and other natural ecosystems to absorb greenhouse gases from the atmosphere.

It is necessary to set up production of advanced domestic equipment for both land and space measurements in order to launch such a system, as well as form Russian satellite constellations, develop methods and algorithms for high-precision calculations, and build appropriate mathematical models. At the same time, our data must be recognised by the world and used to make global decisions on climate.

We have discussed this many times, colleagues, and right now, I am addressing my colleagues in the Government. We can see what is going on in other countries and how the work is organised there in all these areas. And, of course, we must not tolerate unacceptable options and solutions to these vital issues being imposed on us somehow. In order to prevent this from happening, we have to lead in these areas.

Let me repeat: we will be reducing the negative impact of Russian industry, transport, and other sectors on the planet’s climate based on precise and verified data. At the same time, we have to accelerate and modernise economic growth. Of course, this dual task is not an easy one. Further transition to low-carbon, green energy sources is the most important part of the solution.

I have already said many times that it is too early to give up hydrocarbons: they will still be actively used, especially our gas resources, during the next 20–30, and maybe even 50 years. But still, we must understand where all of humanity, the entire planet is heading, and, I repeat once again, be ahead of the curve here. This is especially important, first of all, for the well-being of the environment and the quality of life of Russian citizens, which is a priority for us.

Our innovative projects should be aimed at creating just such advanced, safe and environmentally friendly technologies for energy production, transportation, storage and use. And what is fundamentally important: we need solutions for the subsequent reuse or disposal of resources and equipment, including energy storage devices. This is not an easy task: for example, what should we do with used batteries? This problem is becoming more and more acute in practically all countries.

I can add that, while ranking fourth in the world in terms of energy production in general, Russia already has one of the “cleanest” energy systems with a low carbon footprint. We constantly talk about this, and I think that our colleagues in other countries need to be reminded of this. But we definitely need to move ahead, especially since the geographical and natural features of our country, our scientific capacity allow us to successfully develop absolutely any type of environmentally friendly energy. I mean, among other things, controlled thermonuclear fusion and innovative plasma technologies, in which we are absolute leaders in the world, as well as the use of hydrogen in the chemical industry, metallurgy and transport. Then, a significant increase in the efficiency and environmental safety of both traditional and renewable energy sources. We have to talk about all this today.

Summing up, I consider it fundamental that all our most important innovative projects undergo meaningful scientific review at all stages of implementation, so that plans and actions are formulated jointly with specialists, scientists, experts and practitioners, of course.

As you know, following my instruction, core documents with specific tasks and approaches, with solutions, have been drafted for each of the projects with the participation of the scientific and professional community.

Let us discuss these issues today, starting with the climate agenda.

<…>

Vladimir Putin: I would like to thank all of you for the discussion that we have had and for the proposals that you have formulated.

In conclusion, I would like to note that, of course, we all understand that we will have to work hard, and that we have formulated really complicated tasks. This country does not implement such ambitious science and technology projects very often, especially in its modern history.

This is not merely a question of developing certain unique solutions. Colleagues from the Government have just said that guidelines have already been formulated in specific spheres. But our task is to set up entirely new directions in this country. Quite possibly, this implies entire sectors. As the Minister has just noted, we need to launch our own production and the most advanced equipment and means of production. This is extremely important in order to boost the level of our technological independence, conduct technological upgrading of existing facilities and build new ones, including new enterprises and laboratories, and in order to launch research projects, including the ones involving our compatriots and world-class foreign scientists and researchers. Today, we have to think about launching programmes to train researchers, engineers and workers for emerging economic sectors. Colleagues have also mentioned the human resources issue separately here.

Of course, the results of this work will directly depend on the efficiency and cohesion of specific implementation mechanisms and the actions of those involved in highly important innovative state-level projects. Mr Siluanov has just noted this, and I would like to discuss this matter some time later. Funding is already stipulated for many aspects, and there are also plans to organise the required work. Of course, we need to integrate all this.

In this connection, I would like to note that we adopted a number of landmark decisions exactly a year ago. We expanded the powers of the Council for Science and Education and the Government of the Russian Federation as regards R&D management. In a nutshell, these decisions are aimed at facilitating joint coordination, at clearly dividing responsibility between ministries and agencies, research centres, state-owned higher education institutions and private companies, and at organising all this work in line with technological contours, that is, from research and development projects to obtaining specific goods and mass-producing them.

And I am asking our colleagues from the Government to draft and approve the highly important state-level innovative projects (that we have just discussed) in line with this strict managerial logic and to pay attention to all proposals of the specialists, scientists and experts that were voiced today. This is the first thing.

Second. We have agreed that our innovative programmes will receive support from the state at all stages – from getting fundamental knowledge to making product market-ready. In this regard I ask the Government to devise a clear, efficient and workable financing mechanism agreed by everybody. Mr Siluanov spoke about it in general terms. Of course, it should be borne in mind. However, we should also remember that we need to finance on a priority basis what we already have in the budget for 2022. I want to emphasise this and the Finance Minister has already mentioned it: he spoke about additional sources. They always emerge in the course of our work on the budget. It is clear that everything has been finalised for 2022 but we are distributing additional resources too. In allotting these additional resources please keep in mind that we are discussing one of the priorities today. And, of course, we have to look attentively at the 2023–2024 planning period and make timely amendments or additions.

I want to underscore again: we need to give priority attention to the most important innovation projects that have high status – the status of state importance. Without any exaggeration, they should have a serious, big influence on strengthening our security, our sovereignty, on the country’s development and on raising the wellbeing and the quality of life of our people. They are to provide for a fundamentally different level of health protection for people, advanced and ecologically safe technology for building housing and managing public transport, a modern economic image and, finally, new spheres of applying the labour and personal fulfilment efforts of our people, including young people, who are becoming increasingly more active in solving environmental and climate problems.

Of course, Russia, being a responsible state with a powerful fundamental science capacity, can and should be active in tackling global tasks. I am sure that Russian scientists are capable of making a meaningful contribution to the search for efficient answers to the big challenges facing all countries.

In conclusion, colleagues, I want to congratulate you again on Russian Science Day. All employees of our research centres, universities and, of course, members of the Council for Science and Education, I want to wish you success and good health.

It happens that the birthday of St Petersburg State University Rector Nikolai Kropachev coincides with Russian Science Day. We all warmly congratulate you and wish you a happy birthday and all the best, Mr Kropachev.

Thank you everybody for the joint work today. All the best.

Goodbye.



////



News conference following Russian-French talks
Event_Date: 8/2/2022
Event_Time: 01:05
Event_Place: The_Kremlin_Moscow


Mr President, ladies and gentlemen,

It is a pleasure to welcome you to the Kremlin and to host the President of the French Republic, Mr Emmanuel Macron in Russia.

It appears symbolic that our meeting is taking place on February 7 (it looks like it will end on February 8, Moscow time), the day when a fundamental treaty between Russia and France was signed 30 years ago. That vital document provided a reliable foundation for the development of bilateral cooperation based on partnership and mutual respect for decades to come. Our talks with President Macron today were held in a business-like atmosphere and were substantive and meaningful.

It is clear to us that Mr President has come to Russia primarily to discuss the current issues of European and global security, for which our countries bear special responsibility as permanent members of the UN Security Council. In addition to this, France is holding the presidency of the Council of the European Union.

During the talks, we continued to exchange views on the proposals regarding long-term legally binding security guarantees, which Russia has made to the United States and NATO. I would like to remind everyone that these proposals include three key points: NATO’s non-expansion, non-deployment of offensive weapon systems near the Russian border, and the return of the bloc’s European capabilities and infrastructure to the 1997 level, when the NATO-Russia Founding Act was signed.

Regrettably, the replies from the USA and NATO, which we received on January 26, disregard these concerns of fundamental importance to us. Moreover, our Western partners once again said that all states have a right to freely choose their security arrangements and to enter into any military blocs and alliances. Well, we never questioned this principle. On the other hand, it is also obvious that these blocs and alliances have no obligation to admit any country that wishes to join them.

This open-door policy, which we have discussed with many of our partners, including with President Macron today, is very liberal. We believe that only the United States and possibly several other NATO members are benefitting from this interpretation of the fundamental principle of equal and indivisible security, which has been set down in many European documents and includes, as we all know, a pledge not to strengthen one’s security at the expense of the security of other states.

The reference to the open-door policy, which I have mentioned, is questionable as well. I would like to repeat (I have said this on numerous occasions, including in this very room during a recent news conference following Prime Minister of Hungary Viktor Orban’s visit) that according to Article 10 of the 1949 North Atlantic Treaty, the member states may, by unanimous agreement, invite any other European state in a position to contribute to European security to accede to that treaty. But this does not mean that the bloc is obligated to admit any country, as I have said as well. All right.

However, I would like to point out that they continue trying to placate Russia with deliberations that NATO is a peaceful and purely defensive alliance. People in many countries, namely Iraq, Libya and Afghanistan have learned the truth of this statement the hard way, and this is also true about the large-scale military operation against Belgrade waged without a UN Security Council sanction, which is definitely not an operation that could be waged by a peaceful organisation.

In addition, we cannot overlook the fact that the 2019 NATO Military Strategy openly describes Russia as the main security threat and an adversary. NATO has designated Russia an adversary. Moreover, while advancing its military infrastructure very close to our border, NATO and its member states believe that they have a right to teach us where and how we can deploy our armed forces. They consider it acceptable to demand that we do not hold planned drills and exercises and present the movement of our troops on our own – I repeat, our own – territory as a threat of a Russian invasion, in this case the invasion of Ukraine. They claim that the Baltic states and our other neighbours feel threatened as well. In any case, this presumption is being used to pursue an unfriendly policy towards Russia.

As for the NATO member-countries themselves, they continue to pump Ukraine with modern weapons to this accompaniment, allocating substantial financial resources to modernise the Ukrainian army, and sending military specialists and instructors to Ukraine.

Mr President and I have certainly spoken about this. As you can see, it took us a rather long time: the discussion went on for nearly six hours.

For our part, we have made a point of drawing Mr President’s attention to the reluctance of the current Kiev authorities to meet their commitments under the Minsk Package of Measures and the Normandy format agreements, including those reached at the summits in Paris and Berlin.

In my opinion, it is clear to everyone that the current authorities in Kiev have set a course for dismantling the Minsk accords. There are no shifts on such fundamental issues as constitutional reform, amnesty, local elections, and the legal aspects of a special status for Donbass. The well-known Steinmeier Formula – well-known to specialists, at any rate – when we have approved certain amendments to the Minsk accords and made definite concessions, is yet to be included in Ukrainian legislation. But even these items presented by the current President of the Federal Republic of Germany – at that time, he was the German foreign minister – are not being implemented. Kiev is still disregarding all opportunities for a peaceful restoration of the country’s territorial integrity via direct dialogue with Donetsk and Lugansk.

I have directed Mr President’s attention to the widespread and systematic violations of human rights in Ukraine. Dissenting media are closed in the country and political opponents are exposed to reprisals. Incidentally, when Mr Poroshenko was the President of Ukraine, I told him that Russia was ready to grant him political asylum, if he faced problems in the future. He was highly ironic in this regard at the time, but today I would like to reiterate my offer. Despite our serious differences regarding this matter, I mean the settlement in Donbass, as well as the fact that, to my mind, he has made a lot of mistakes in this area, his persecution as a state criminal is also, in my view, an exorbitant ‘bid for success’ on the part of today’s leaders. Russia is ready to grant asylum to Mr Poroshenko and persons like him.

What worries me most of all is that they are adopting legislation that discriminates against Russian speakers, who have been denied the right to be recognised as a core nation in what is, properly speaking, their homeland, and the right to speak their native language, which is quite odd because this is in no way reflected in the approaches adopted by the European countries.

We hope that Mr President intends – at any rate, he said so earlier today – to discuss what we have discussed today as regards European security and stability guarantees at his meeting with the Kiev leaders tomorrow.

We also touched upon other topical international and regional matters.

While reviewing the situation around Nagorno Karabakh, we noted the positive role of the Russian peacekeepers who are ensuring compliance with the ceasefire regime and helping the region return to peaceful life. We reaffirmed the great significance of efforts by the OSCE Minsk Group’s co-chairs in addressing topical humanitarian and socioeconomic matters in the region, among other things. The President of France informed us of the results of his recent videoconference meeting with President of the European Council Charles Michel, the President of Azerbaijan and the Prime Minister of Armenia.

We reviewed the situation around the Iranian nuclear programme and efforts to resume the full-fledged implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, adopted in 2015 and approved by UN Security Council Resolution 2231. We agree that it is necessary to continue diplomatic efforts and to assist in the coordination of compromise solutions in the interests of preserving this highly important document. We agreed that our positions are very similar here or, as the diplomats say, they match.

Naturally, we did not overlook topical matters of bilateral relations, primarily those regarding economic interaction. Despite the complicated situation caused by the Covid-19 pandemic and volatility on the global markets, we underscored and noted that mutual trade grew by 71 percent in 11 months of 2021. French investment in Russia exceeds $23 billion. Over 600 French companies are operating successfully on the Russian market.

Overall, we agreed to continue our mutually beneficial cooperation in politics, trade and the economy, as well as in other spheres, including cultural and humanitarian ties.

To conclude, I would like to thank Mr President for his efforts and the efforts of France to resolve a highly acute matter linked with our relations with NATO in general, matters linked with maintaining security, creating a situation of stability and mutual trust on the European continent and, of course, resolving the crisis in southeastern Ukraine.

We have already met in Paris, and I know that, despite numerous problems facing any state leader, especially the leader of a major European state, Mr President deemed it necessary to come to Russia and to exchange opinions on how we should act in the future. I believe that, although it is still too early to talk about some of his ideas and proposals, it is possible to make them the foundation of our future joint steps.

Let us see what Mr President’s meeting will achieve in Kiev. We agreed that we will speak on the telephone after his trip to the capital of Ukraine and exchange opinions on this matter.

Thank you.



Article by Vladimir Putin ”Russia and China: A Future-Oriented Strategic Partnership“ for the Chinese News Agency Xinhua
Event_Date: 3/2/2022
Event_Time: 02:00
Event_Place: The_Kremlin_Moscow


On the eve of my upcoming visit to China, I am pleased to address directly the large Chinese and foreign audience of Xinhua, the world's largest news agency.

Our countries are close neighbours bound by centuries-old traditions of friendship and trust. We highly appreciate that Russian-Chinese relations of comprehensive partnership and strategic cooperation, entering a new era, have reached an unprecedented level and have become a model of efficiency, responsibility, and aspiration for the future. The basic principles and guidelines for joint work were defined by our countries in the Treaty of Good Neighborliness and Friendly Cooperation, the twentieth anniversary of which we celebrated last year. These are, first and foremost, equality, consideration of one another's interests, freedom from political and ideological circumstances, as well as from the vestiges of the past. These are the principles we are consistently building on year after year in the spirit of continuity to deepen our political dialogue. Despite the difficulties caused by the coronavirus pandemic, we are striving to dynamically build the capacity of economic partnerships and expand humanitarian exchanges.

During the upcoming visit, the President of the People's Republic of China Xi Jinping and I will thoroughly discuss key issues on the bilateral, regional, and global agendas. It is symbolic that our meeting will take place during the Spring Festival – the Chinese Lunar New Year. After all, as the Chinese saying goes, ”make your whole year's plan in the spring“.

The development of business ties will certainly be given special attention. There is every opportunity for this as our countries have substantial financial, industrial, technological and human resources allowing us to successfully resolve long-term development issues. By working together, we can achieve stable economic growth and improve the well-being of our citizens, strengthen our competitiveness, and stand together against today's risks and challenges.

At the end of 2021, the volume of mutual trade increased by more than a third, exceeding the record level of 140 billion U.S. dollars. We are well on the way towards our goal of increasing the volume of trade to 200 billion U.S. dollars a year. A number of important initiatives are being implemented in the investment, manufacturing, and agro-industrial sectors. In particular, the portfolio of the Intergovernmental Commission on Investment Cooperation includes 65 projects worth over 120 billion U.S. dollars. This is about collaboration in such industries as mining and mineral processing, infrastructure construction, and agriculture.

We are consistently expanding the practice of settlements in national currencies and creating mechanisms to offset the negative impact of unilateral sanctions. A major milestone in this work was the signing of the Agreement between the Government of Russia and the Government of the PRC on payments and settlements in 2019.

A mutually beneficial energy alliance is being formed between our countries. Along with long-term supplies of Russian hydrocarbons to China, we have plans to implement a number of large-scale joint projects. The construction of four new power units at Chinese nuclear power plants with the participation of Rosatom State Corporation launched last year is one of them. All this significantly strengthens the energy security of China and the Asia region as a whole.

We see an array of opportunities in the development of partnerships in information and communication technologies, medicine, space exploration, including the use of national navigation systems and the International Lunar Research Station project. A serious impetus to strengthening bilateral ties was given by the cross Years of Russian-Chinese Scientific, Technical and Innovative Cooperation in 2020–2021.

We are grateful to our Chinese colleagues for their assistance in launching the production of Russian Sputnik V and Sputnik Light vaccines in China and for the timely supply of necessary protective equipment to our country. We hope that this cooperation will develop and strengthen.

One of Russia's strategic objectives is to accelerate the social and economic upliftment of Siberia and the Russian Far East. These territories are immediate neighbors of the PRC. We also intend to actively develop interregional ties. Thus, the modernization of the Baikal-Amur Mainline and the Trans-Siberian Railway has been started. By 2024, their capacity must increase one and a half times through higher volumes of transit cargo and reduced transport time. The port infrastructure in the Russian Far East is also growing. All this should further enhance the complementarity of the Russian and Chinese economies.

And, of course, the conservation of nature and shared ecosystems remains an important area of bilateral cross-border and interregional cooperation. These issues have always been the focus of our countries' public attention, and we will certainly discuss them in detail during the negotiations, as well as a wide range of humanitarian topics.

Russia and China are countries with thousands of years of unique traditions and tremendous cultural heritage, the interest in which is persistently high both in our countries and abroad. It is true that in the last two years the number of tourists, joint mass events, and direct contacts between our citizens has reduced due to the pandemic. However, I have no doubt that we will catch up and, as soon as the situation allows, will launch new outreach and educational programs to introduce our citizens to the history and present-day life of the two countries. Thus, President Xi Jinping and I have agreed to hold the Years of Russian-Chinese cooperation in physical fitness and sports in 2022 and 2023.

Certainly, an important part of the visit will be a discussion of relevant international topics. The coordination of the foreign policy of Russia and China is based on close and coinciding approaches to solving global and regional issues. Our countries play an important stabilizing role in today's challenging international environment, promoting the democratization of the system of interstate relations to make it more equitable and inclusive. We are working together to strengthen the central coordinating role of the United Nations in global affairs and to prevent the international legal system, with the UN Charter at its centre, from being eroded.

Russia and China are actively cooperating on the broadest agenda within BRICS, RIC, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, as well as other associations. Within the G20, we are committed to taking national specifics into account when formulating our recommendations, be it the fight against pandemics or the implementation of the climate agenda. Thanks to a large extent to our countries' shared solidarity, following the 2021 G20 Summit in Rome informed decisions were made on international cooperation to restore economic growth, recognize vaccines and vaccine certificates, optimize energy transitions, and reduce digitalization risks.

We also have convergent positions on international trade issues. We advocate maintaining an open, transparent and non-discriminatory multilateral trading system based on the rules of the World Trade Organization. We support relaunching of global supply chains. Back in March 2020, Russia proposed an initiative on ”green trade corridors“ that excludes any sanctions, political and administrative barriers. Its implementation is a useful aid to overcoming the economic consequences of the pandemic.

The XXIV Olympic Winter Games starting in Beijing are a major event of global significance. Russia and China are leading sporting nations renowned for their sporting traditions and not once have hosted the largest international competitions with dignity. I fondly remember my visit to Beijing in August 2008 to attend the 2008 Summer Olympics opening ceremony. Guests and athletes from Russia will remember the vivid performance for a long time, and the Games themselves were organized with the scale and exceptional hospitality inherent to our Chinese friends. For our part, we were delighted to host President Xi Jinping at the opening of the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi.

Sadly, attempts by a number of countries to politicize sports to the benefit of their ambitions have recently intensified. This is fundamentally wrong and contrary to the very spirit and principles of the Olympic Charter. The power and greatness of sports are that it brings people together, gives moments of triumph and pride for the country and delights with fair, just and uncompromising competition. And these approaches are shared by most of the states participating in the international Olympic Movement.

Our Chinese friends have done tremendous work to prepare well for the Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games. I am convinced that China's extensive experience in the excellent organization of representative international competitions will make it possible to hold this festival of world sports at the highest level. I would like to wish the Russian and Chinese teams impressive results and new records!

I send my warmest congratulations to the friendly people of China on the occasion of the Spring Festival, which marks the beginning of the Year of the Tiger. I wish you good health, prosperity, and success.



////



Meeting to mark the 300th anniversary of the prosecutor's office in Russia
Event_Date: 12/1/2022
Event_Time: 12:55
Event_Place: The_Kremlin_Moscow


Mr Krasnov, colleagues, friends, current workers and veterans of the prosecutor's office,

Today we are celebrating a major historical event, the 300th anniversary of the creation of the prosecutor's office in Russia.

I congratulate you on reaching such a significant milestone and wish you all the best on your professional holiday. I would like to extend the kindest words to everyone who views serving the law and the Fatherland as a matter of life and destiny, everyone who continues to serve people on this holiday, to respond to violations of law and order, to participate in court hearings, protecting the interests of the people, of our entire society.

Without exaggeration, a very important and significant body was added to Russia’s state system in 1722. The prosecutor's office, formed by Peter the Great, became the country's highest supervisory body. “Supervise hard” was what Peter the Great ordered in one of his decrees, and these words determined the substance and the very nature of a prosecutor’s work.

The role of the prosecutor's office continued to grow during Catherine the Great's time, and then during the reforms of Alexander II. That was fully justified because the prosecutor's office worked in an appropriate manner; prosecutors monitored the work of leading state institutions, protected the interests of the treasury and supported prosecution in court. It is impossible to imagine the development of Russian laws and the entire judicial system without their contribution.

The names of Pavel Yaguzhinsky, Alexander Vyazemsky, Dmitry Dashkov and others went down in Russia’s history as prominent leaders of the prosecutor's office. They set the high standards for many future generations of the office’s employees.

We also remember that, even after the revolutionary upheavals in the 20th century and during the tragic period of massive repressions, the best workers of the prosecutor's office preserved their professional honour and good name. They shared the hardest trials with many of our people, with many citizens, with all people of Russia.

At the same time, I am expecting you to address your tasks even more quickly and competently, and I hopethat you will always be guided by order and justice, by efforts to protect the people, their rights, freedoms and legitimate interests, and that this will serve as your main value.

In this connection, I would like to note that, in their work, prosecutors should, first of all, prioritise people’s complaints and the solution of the problems that concern them the most. Last year, people submitted about five million complaints to prosecutor’s offices, and this means that they can see and appreciate your efforts, and it is important to justify their trust.

First of all, it is necessary to quickly and attentively respond to any encroachments on citizens’ social rights, to ensure timely and complete payments, the required benefits, compensations and so on, so that people obtain high-quality medical treatment. First and foremost, this, of course, concerns people with disabilities and retired persons, orphaned children, underprivileged families and those with many children.

Efforts to fight corruption, extremism and other crimes are one of your high-priority tasks. The prosecution authorities alone are supposed to coordinate the actions of all law enforcement agencies in the struggle against the criminal threat, and it is necessary to use your wide-ranging powers more effectively at all stages, from crime prevention and detection to indicting defendants in the courtroom. You should act skilfully, firmly and consistently.

It is necessary to more closely monitor compliance with law in prisons and penitentiaries. This work should be conducted in collaboration with other state agencies, and public and human rights organisations.

Protection of entrepreneurs’ rights is another important task. We often discuss this matter, and one can even say that we discuss it all the time. Over the past 13 years, since the enactment of the law on state control, prosecutors’ oversight has rid businesses of millions of unjustified checks. You should not rest on your laurels, and you should step up this work and continue with it. The business and investment climate, as well as the overall successful and dynamic development of the national economy, largely depend on this.

Ecology, environmental protection, above all strict observation of modern standards in this area should permanently remain the focus of attention.

I will add that new important powers were conferred on the Prosecutor General’s Office in the summer of 2021. I mean representation of our country in interstate authorities, foreign and international courts and arbitration tribunals. Actually, this creates additional mechanisms for protecting Russia’s interests and our citizens’ rights. I seriously expect the prosecutors to do this job at the highest professional level.

And, of course, in all key areas the prosecutor’s supervision should be of a pre-emptive nature. I have said this on numerous occasions and want to underscore it once again: it is important not only to stop any violations of law but to reveal systemic issues too – this is also one of the ways to enhance the efficiency of your work.

Friends,

The three-century-long journey of our prosecutor’s office is a history of statehood protection, of service to the law and society, and the state, on its part, will pay the most serious attention to the support and development of the prosecution system, improve the legal framework of your activity, and enhance the technical, information and analysis, and, of course, human resources potential.

At all times, at the sharpest turning points in history, the best employees of the prosecutor's office were distinguished by their objectivity and independence, responsibility and personal integrity. On this special day I want to say thank you to the veterans, who faithfully served the law and our country, and to express gratitude to the entire prosecution corps of Russia for finding responsible solutions to serious problems facing our country.

I am sure of your professionalism and that by your dedicated work and achievements, you will write new remarkable pages in the history of Russia’s prosecutor’s office.

I wish you every success and congratulate you on your holiday.



////



Joint Statement of the Leaders of the Five Nuclear-Weapons States on Preventing Nuclear War and Avoiding Arms Races
Event_Date: 3/1/2022
Event_Time: 16:00
Event_Place: The_Kremlin_Moscow


The People’s Republic of China, the French Republic, the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United States of America consider the avoidance of war between Nuclear-Weapon States and the reduction of strategic risks as our foremost responsibilities.

We affirm that a nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought. As nuclear use would have far-reaching consequences, we also affirm that nuclear weapons – for as long as they continue to exist – should serve defensive purposes, deter aggression, and prevent war. We believe strongly that the further spread of such weapons must be prevented.

We reaffirm the importance of addressing nuclear threats and emphasize the importance of preserving and complying with our bilateral and multilateral non-proliferation, disarmament, and arms control agreements and commitments. We remain committed to our Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) obligations, including our Article VI obligation “to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament, and on a treaty on general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control.”

We each intend to maintain and further strengthen our national measures to prevent unauthorized or unintended use of nuclear weapons. We reiterate the validity of our previous statements on de-targeting, reaffirming that none of our nuclear weapons are targeted at each other or at any other State.

We underline our desire to work with all states to create a security environment more conducive to progress on disarmament with the ultimate goal of a world without nuclear weapons with undiminished security for all. We intend to continue seeking bilateral and multilateral diplomatic approaches to avoid military confrontations, strengthen stability and predictability, increase mutual understanding and confidence, and prevent an arms race that would benefit none and endanger all. We are resolved to pursue constructive dialogue with mutual respect and acknowledgment of each other’s security interests and concerns.



////



Meeting on heating season
Event_Date: 29/12/2021
Event_Time: 18:15
Event_Place: St_Peresburg


Good afternoon, colleagues.

The New Year holidays are approaching and by tradition, many of our people will spend them at home, with their families and friends. All of us understand how important it is to ensure, during these long holidays, the reliable, failsafe operation of all housing and utility companies, continuous production cycle businesses, transport, and many other economic and social branches that provide services for the daily life of our cities and villages.

Today, I suggest discussing in detail how the national energy complex copes with peak loads. This year it is taking place against the backdrop of economic recovery and increasing energy consumption. In December, this indicator hit a historical high.

I would like to note that in general the national energy complex is working steadily. That said – I must put it straight – far from all regions keep their grids and equipment in proper condition. Meanwhile, before the start of the heating season, we discussed this situation many times, and I was assured that everything was in excellent shape everywhere. As usual, there are setbacks: some constituent entities of the Federation are facing difficulties in the operation of their housing and utility sectors and require additional material and human resources.

During the news conference last week, a journalist from Buryatia spoke about a major utility accident in Ulan-Ude. True, a fire at a station triggered it, but it was still an accident. Because of this emergency, many city residents were left without hot water and heating. I know that the regional authorities and relevant companies are doing all they can to eliminate the consequences of this accident.

At the same time, it is obvious that the federal authorities must also keep this issue under their permanent control. I would like to hear what measures to help Buryatia have been taken and what the plan is for them.

One more point. Another journalist, from Daghestan, said during the news conference that the region's energy companies are failing to meet the needs of the regional economy and social sphere. I know they have a tangle of longstanding problems such as low payment discipline, a non-transparent and ineffective structure of ownership of generating facilities and grids. I would also like to ask you to specifically look into this problem today.

Again, it is our most important responsibility to make sure that every flat and house, industrial and social facility across the country, every city and community is reliably supplied with heat and electricity. We need to ensure that the housing and utilities system works smoothly and accurately, especially in winter, during low temperatures, that energy resources are supplied regularly, predictably and at affordable prices. By the way, unfortunately, this is far from the case today in many countries.

The situation in the housing and utilities sector is primarily the responsibility of the regions and municipalities, and it is clear why. This industry is huge, and it is better to monitor locally the state of the heating and power grids, generating facilities, boiler houses, etc., to check what sections should be put into operation and when and what needs to be repaired in time.

At the same time, I would like to point out that the relevant federal ministry and the Government also need to constantly monitor the hands-on situation in the regions. Consumers do not have to care whose responsibility it is – it is important that everything functions properly, especially in those places where the climate is the most severe.

In those climates, any accident or abnormal situation can have the most serious consequences. It is extremely important to respond to emergencies quickly, as quickly as possible, to help our colleagues in the regions deal with any problem that might emerge.

Today I ask you to report on the tools and mechanisms you propose to employ in emergencies, as well as on your systemic work that is being done to improve the reliability of energy distribution. In this regard, let me remind you that housing and utility upgrades are among the key projects eligible for the easy-term infrastructure loans we provide to the regions.

I would like to close my opening remarks with yet another important matter. As you are aware, steady gas supply to the domestic market is our top priority when it comes to expanding gas infrastructure in our country, which is why major gas infrastructure development projects are underway in the regions. Residents of communities with pipeline gas availability will have gas brought to their houses before the end of 2022, as agreed.

To ensure reliable and stable distribution for the long term, the domestic fuel and energy companies are carrying out long-term development plans and developing new fields. Given the challenging circumstances our foreign partners are now in, Russia can increase gas exports.

The first string of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline was filled with technical gas in October. As I understand it – and I want Mr Miller, Gazprom CEO, to cover this in his report – the second string Nord Stream 2 will be filled with gas today. This pipeline’s total capacity is 55 billion cubic metres of gas, all supplied to our colleagues in Europe.

Again, I would like Mr Miller to cover this in detail. This additional route will undoubtedly help stabilise prices on the European market. I would like you to discuss this at the meeting today as well as the overall situation in Europe, because our main consumers are in Europe.

Let's move on to discussing the issues under review.

<…>

Gazprom CEO Alexei Miller: Mr President,

Ensuring a successful heating season in Russia is Gazprom’s main task. Prior to pumping gas from underground storage facilities, we had 72.638 billion cubic metres of reserve gas. It is possible to pump 847.9 million cubic metres daily. Reserve gas volumes and daily pumping capacities have hit an all-time high in this country.

There was a steep drop in ambient temperatures in Russia from the second week of December. On December 23, the average temperature was minus 17 degrees Celsius in all regions covered by the Unified Gas Supply System. This is 9.3 degrees lower than the average seasonal level. These days gas supplies to Russian consumers on the domestic market and the pumping of gas from the country’s underground gas reservoirs have reached an all-time high for the last 10 years since 2012.

At the same time, Gazprom has, as always, reliably supplied gas to Russian consumers and to our customers abroad, and it continues to do so. We completely fulfil our export contact obligations under long-term bilateral contracts in accordance with specific requests.

As of today, 12.36 billion cubic metres of gas, or 17 percent of all reserve gas, have been pumped from Russia’s underground storage facilities which are now filled to 83 percent of their capacity.

Mr President, as per your instruction, Gazprom pumped its own gas into Europe’s underground reservoirs throughout November and December. In late December, the volume of gas involved will total one billion cubic metres.

On December 21–25, European operators pumped record-breaking volumes of gas from underground European reservoirs, reaching the highest levels for many years. Today, Europe’s underground reservoirs have been depleted by 44 percent, and those of Germany, by 47 percent.

At the same time, it should be noted that reserve gas volumes in Europe’s underground reservoirs are 21 billion cubic metres less than for the same period in 2020. They are 28 percent or almost one-third lower. Underground reservoirs have a substantial shortage of gas, and this continues to have a serious impact on the European gas market.

Gazprom has completely fulfilled its obligations under a contract to pump gas via Ukrainian territory. We were to pump 40 billion cubic metres of gas, and we have already pumped 41.5 billion cubic metres of gas via Ukraine. On December 24, Ukraine’s underground reservoirs hit an all-time low in terms of reserve gas volumes. Today, Ukraine holds less than 14 billion cubic metres of gas reserves, which is ten billion less than it had in late December 2020.

Mr President, today at 12.58 pm Moscow time Gazprom completed filling the second string of Nord Stream 2, and now both legs of the pipeline are at the operating pressure and ready to go. The Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline has a design capacity of 55 billion cubic metres per year and is the longest offshore gas pipeline in the world, at 1,234 kilometres.

Mr President, the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline is ready for operation.

<…>

Vladimir Putin: I would like to congratulate Gazprom and your Nord Stream 2 partners on the completion of this project to build this large additional pipeline and on this pipeline being ready for operation. Now the start is up to our partners, consumers in Europe, in Germany. As soon as they make the decision on the launch of operation, a large additional amount of Russian gas will immediately begin to flow towards Europe. Let me remind you that we are talking about 55 billion cubic metres a year. By the way, this should immediately affect the price on the market, on the spot market. And all those countries and consumers of Russian gas are bound to feel it right away. This applies to businesses and households alike.

Even in Ukraine, this should shift prices downward, because they buy a significant amount of Russia-produced gas at European market prices, which are fairly high – $1,000 or more, $1,000 per 1,000 cubic metres. This will immediately influence the prices in a country like Ukraine, which, for political reasons, unfortunately, refuses to buy gas directly from Russia and has to pay such a high price because of this. But if the Nord Stream begins operation, it will also have a positive effect on prices for a country like Ukraine.

But again, now it is our European partners’ turn to act, and it is up to them. We have completed a project to develop this additional gas transportation route with our partners, by the way, European companies, with five European companies. Nord Stream 2 is ready to go.

So much for our exports. I would like to return to where we started, back to the matters that brought us together today. We need to make sure that Russia goes through the period of the lowest temperatures safely and reliably, without any failures. We know that certain disruptions are inevitable in such cold weather as we observe today. As long as the response is instantaneous, and all repairs are performed as quickly as possible and with high quality, people will not feel any disruptions in the energy system’s operation.

I would like to ask Mr Maxim Oreshkin and his colleagues to prepare draft instructions following this meeting.

Happy New Year, everyone!

Goodbye, and all the best.



////



Joint meeting of the State Council and the Council for Science and Education
Event_Date: 24/12/2021
Event_Time: 17:00
Event_Place: Novo-Ogaryovo_Moscow_Region

Good afternoon, colleagues, friends.

Today we are holding a joint meeting of the State Council and the Council for Science and Education. It is being attended by the heads of regions and political parties, representatives of our science and research community, members of the Government and the Security Council.

This expanded meeting is held on the occasion of the end of the Year of Science and Technology. We will sum up the results and discuss our joint plans for the further development of science in general and of scientific education, taking into account the huge attention given to the achievements of our scientists by our society and citizens.

Of course, we also need to consider the growing public demand for modernisation of our cities and all other residential areas based on the latest technological and environmental standards and the comprehensive use of cutting-edge scientific research achievements in everyday life.

In this context, one more important issue on our agenda – further steps to build up the innovation potential of Russian regions as a key condition of wellbeing and a high quality of life for people across our vast country.

This is not just about creating new knowledge and technology. Again, it is extremely important to use these directly in practical terms in healthcare and education, on transport and utility infrastructure, in resolving environmental, social and other socially important tasks.

I will say again that Russia and our regions can only develop together with science. This is why for two decades we have consistently tried to expand the scientific geography of the country, focusing on the formation of advanced research infrastructure and the strengthening of universities in the regions. As a result, the number of universities engaged in research has increased almost three-fold.

Research and backbone universities in the regions of the Federation have become real flagships for whole territories.

Joint objectives are already uniting research universities, institutes and companies from different regions of Russia. We will certainly encourage such cooperation in the future as well, because our enormous country badly needs distributed scientific development, as we have said many times. Not some individual centres located in just a few areas but a truly integral space covering the entire country– as Academician Vernadsky used to say, an area of scientific pursuit, creative solutions, education, support and encouragement of the talents of advanced technical business. This is the approach that lies at the foundation of research and educational centres in the world and is vital for implementing federal programmes on genetics and agriculture.

I know that important and innovative projects of national significance will receive a broad regional dimension. They will be aimed at resolving medical and pharmaceutical goals, as well as problems related to climate change and development of new energy sources.

What do I consider extremely important? We can set ambitious research goals because we have created strong personnel potential and will certainly develop and strengthen it. In this context, I would like to tell you about the new plans that were prepared after our meeting with young scientists at Sirius in early December.

First, the mega grants programme will continue. We will rearrange the requirements to enable prominent scientists to create strong international research teams here in Russia which will attract not only young researchers from within the country, but also our compatriots and foreign specialists. In fact, this is already the case, and I hope that this will carry on in the future. Of course, the mission of these world-class laboratories is to expand and reinforce opportunities across the country. They will be created in universities and research centres in the Volga Region, in Siberia, in Russia’s Far East, its central and southern parts, and of course in the northern regions of our country.

By the way, biologists, experts in environment protection and other fields, including climate change, are currently working in Russia’s Arctic territories, in the challenging environment of the Extreme North. Of course, we must support these researchers, including paying them the so-called northern bonuses in full, not later, in many years, but here and now, the very first month they start working there. This was also among the requests I heard during a meeting with our colleagues at the Sirius centre. Let me note that for most locations in Russia’s Extreme North, these bonuses amount to about 80 percent of wages. This is a substantial increase for a researcher, considering that, as you know, scientists must be paid at the level of 200 percent of the average wage in the region.

I would like to make a special point on youth support. Thanks to the Russian Science Foundation, we already have a comprehensive programme for allocating grants to young researchers for undertaking various projects, from small studies to running research teams. I am certain that post-graduate students must also benefit from clear and unified incentives of this kind. Of course, I am referring to young researchers who are serious about science and achieve something, who already work for the benefit of their regions and are ready to implement their innovations there.

As for housing, during the meeting at Sirius, our colleagues also asked me to expand the housing certificate programme and make sure young researchers and university faculty members who achieve substantial results and succeed in their work are the first to get these certificates, regardless of how long they have been working and what ministry or agency the organisation that employs them reports to. The same principles must apply to apartments these people rent from their institutions. It is hard to argue with that, and I agree with this proposal – the Government must take all the necessary decisions in this regard quickly.

Colleagues,

Our science is among the world’s youngest in terms of the researchers’ age, and its capacity is being strengthened at the institutions of higher learning and universities. Importantly, an increasing number of parents are supporting their children in their choice to pursue a scientific career. In our country, researchers under 40 account for 44.3 percent of academia. Almost two-thirds of the parents, two-thirds of adults in our country want to see their children choose a scientific career. These meaningful, positive and, I am sure, long-term trends must be supported.

At least 25 university campuses will be built in the 2020s. Importantly, they must be outfitted with advanced equipment for academic and research activities and with proper amenities for playing sports, launching start-ups and operating technology companies. These things need to be planned in advance before starting this large-scale work. This programme must be an example of joint work of the government, business, and constituent entities of the Federation aimed at creating a modern environment for young, talented people. This is the most important condition for advancing scientific research and technology in our regions.

Today, we will definitely discuss mechanisms and the best models for creating social and residential infrastructure and public spaces next to universities and research centres in the regions of the Federation with the involvement of development institutions.

In this regard, I would like to emphasise that the tools and the federal programmes that were mentioned today will pay off if and only if – and here I want to address heads of the constituent entities of the Federation – if you, colleagues, meaningfully engage in technological, scientific and educational development, and only if you see this area as a powerful resource and understand the importance of these matters for the people and for the fulfilment of young people in your respective regions and cities. So, please make sure to communicate closely with young researchers, students and even school research teams, provide them with weighty support, and create better opportunities for launching innovative projects that will become a magnet for talent from other regions and even other countries.

Of course, it is the Russian regions working with large companies, including state-owned companies, that should act as qualified consumers of knowledge and technology, especially since our fundamental groundwork allows businesses to create unique competitive solutions. In order to do this, we need to lift a number of remaining barriers that hinder cooperation between science and the regions, and to create conditions for businesses to invest more actively in technological development. So I would like to ask the members of the State Council and the Council for Science and Education as well as the Government to address these issues. You know what I mean. Nevertheless, let me repeat some things.

First, we have to help scientific and innovative teams get through the most difficult stage and do it efficiently, quickly, and effectively; this is the technology approbation stage in real life. Next we need to start implementing them in the city, at enterprises and institutions. I mean up-to-date regulatory control, including application of experimental legal regimes in the Russian regions. Of course, it is necessary to use the resources of our world-class scientific and education centres, which would include direct interaction between science and companies operating in the regions.

Second, we need to expand the Russian regions’ alternatives for supporting scientific and technology projects, assist regional scientific foundations that provide grants for research and development. Let me also note that the State Duma has adopted, in the first reading, a draft law that allows regional budgets to fund the work at federal institutions, such as universities and research organisations. I would like to draw the attention of my colleagues from the Government and from the parliament: regions with low fiscal capacity should also have this support. I understand the questions that arise in this context, but I still believe that this should be done even for the regions that receive subsidies, if they can justify their expenses accordingly. In general, I am asking you to resolve any existing disagreements as soon as possible and adopt the necessary amendments to the law.

Third, we need to create a base of Russian technology solutions that are already in use in the Russian regions and that have already proven their effectiveness; for example, a common digital platform of best practices would serve to ensure interaction between teams of entrepreneurs, scientists, and management teams all across Russia.

Finally, I consider it necessary to encourage those regions in the Federation that are working to increase their scientific and technological potential. The logic here is very understandable and simple. Additional support must be given to those territories that make breakthrough developments and launch major research, innovative and education projects. This means that researchers, entrepreneurs and engineers go there to implement the needed projects for developing these territories. I know that at a special seminar with experts from the Council for Science and Education the governors discussed in detail successful approaches and projects in this area and new steps on developing science and technology in the regions. Today, I would like to hear your proposals that, I hope, are a response to those debates.

One more point: starting next year, the events of the Congress of Young Scientists will take place all over the country, in different regions. Young scientists at Sirius asked me about this, in part, to enable our research teams to meet with their potential customers, that is, you, your colleagues from regional teams and business representatives. I know that you (I am talking to the regional governors again) will personally take part in these meetings. This is very important, and this is my request to you.

Friends,

Before we move to speeches and discussions, I would like to turn again to the results of the Year of Science and Technology. I will repeat that the main, key result is a fundamentally new level of scientific education. Using advanced technology, tens of millions of people saw lectures by scientists and hours-long marathons of the revived Knowledge society. It is no exaggeration to say that public interest in science, its history and achievements is tremendous.

I think it would be appropriate to make the Year of Science and Technology the beginning of a decade that will further encourage the development of education in Russia. I am confident that all political and public entities will support this decision.

Of course, I hope for engaged participation from our regions in this work. First, I would like to ask you to help create centres for research volunteers, including at universities, and provide assistance in drafting education tour routes. I mean taking students and schoolchildren on expeditions and excursions to mega-science class installations, research centres, the Vostochny Cosmodrome and the like. All these are opportunities for young people to become familiar with the work of our scientists and Russian science and to continue its great history into the future. I have no doubt that this is how it will be.

Using this opportunity, I would like to once again thank our school students who won all international academic competitions in natural sciences this year – physics, chemistry, biology, mathematics and informatics. Let’s wish new success to them together.

<…>

Vladimir Putin: First, I would like to thank everyone for your hard work this year. Second, I would like to ask the Government and the Presidential Executive Office to finalise the list of Presidential instructions based on the results of our joint work this year and, of course, with consideration for the proposals made at today’s meeting.

I looked carefully at some things while preparing for this meeting and now, during our discussion, I see some issues that require additional work (I will not torture anyone about it now) on taxation and additional funding. I understand the subtleties of these proposals, and we need to analyse them properly with the Finance Ministry. I would like to ask Mr Siluanov [Finance Minister] to approach this task with due consideration for the importance of the subject we discussed today.

I would like to congratulate you on the upcoming holidays. We will certainly continue this work in the future.

I talked about a decade, and this is what we should do. This is the road we will follow. But it is important to make sure this idea does not become trite, that it does not simply turn into a declaration that we will be involved with science for the next ten years. Science requires ongoing attention, whether we are talking about the past 100 years or 300 years or in the next decade, but we need to organise this effort in a way that will make it exciting. As my colleagues said it should be made interesting and attract young people. In principle, we are succeeding with this goal, and I have told you about the number of young researchers in our country. This number will grow, and the future of Russian science will certainly be guaranteed if we consistently implement the tasks that we have set.

In conclusion, I would like to address Mr Manturov. I think he knows that a salvo launch of the Tsircon hypersonic system was made this night, or more precisely, in the early morning hours. The Tsircon supersonic system is our latest missile that can hit sea- and ground-based targets. Yes, the test was successful, it was impeccable, and it is a great event in the life of our country and a big step towards increasing Russia’s security and enhancing its defence capability.

I would like to ask you to convey my best wishes and congratulations to the teams that worked on this advance, to thank them for the result. I want to express my most sincere words of gratitude to the developers, designers, engineers and workers, all those who were involved in this.

Thank you very much. All the best.



////



Meeting with Government members
Event_Date: 24/12/2021
Event_Time: 14:55
Event_Place: Novo-Ogaryovo_Moscow_Region


We are holding this meeting with only one week left until the New Year. It is right around the corner. We meet in this format every year. You know that the last days of the year usually fly by very quickly. People are busy trying to do more than they usually do, meet deadlines and deliver on their plans. I have no doubt that this is the way the Government is working right now, although probably this is the way the Government always works, not just today, with the New Year holidays fast approaching. After all, we live in challenging times, requiring all of us to be as effective and proactive as possible.

With all my heart, I would like to wish you a Happy New Year and thank you for your work. I do understand and I can see that all of you have had to shoulder an additional burden. You have been managing this workload quite efficiently, acting in a concise manner and staying united as a team, as true professionals.

Not only did the national economy recover from last year’s downturn but it has already exceeded pre-crisis levels and is once again expanding. The situation on the labour market is now even better than it was before the crisis. Unemployment is declining.

Our effort to fight this dangerous epidemic is in its second year. We continued to undertake targeted measures to support people, families with children and preserve jobs, as well as assist the key sectors of the economy and enterprises, SMEs and socially-oriented non-profit organisations. This has required a major system-wide effort from us.

However, we know all too well that we have yet to rein in the epidemic. Unfortunately, too many people are still falling sick and dying every day. For this reason, I am asking you to continue paying special attention to matters related to supporting the healthcare system and to all epidemic control measures, including during the holiday season in early 2022.

In this connection, I would like to say a few words about the system-wide efforts that we will undertake next year.

Let me note that overall, national projects have been advancing on schedule despite all the challenges and the adjustments we were forced to make. You and I regularly discuss this. We are almost halfway through with these national projects. They have been in place for three years now, and all the plans we have announced must be fulfilled within the next three-year period. We discussed this recently at the Council for Strategic Development and National Projects.

Once again, I would like to emphasise that we must place people and their wellbeing at the centre of all our large-scale efforts to deliver on the national development goals. People must see and feel, as we have been saying all along, tangible change for the better in metropolitan cities, as well as in small towns and rural areas. This is what national projects are all about. Next year, we will all aspire to achieve these tangible and visible results.

Russia is mostly past the economic recovery stage. Our economy has shown high resiliency in the context of the pandemic and complex global challenges. Now we move to the next level where we need to ensure high-quality and long-term economic growth right away, without a pause. To achieve this, we have substantial state resources and the high investment potential of private business. We must use all growth factors to full capacity. I am referring to the aggressive development of infrastructure, digitalisation and technological upgrade of industries, promoting energy efficiency and advanced environmental standards, increasing non-resource exports, training forward-looking employees, and supporting people’s business initiative.

Naturally, our goal is not economic growth per se; that is not an end in itself. It is needed to create new jobs, to create a modern living environment across the country, in our cities and towns, and drive an increase in the people’s incomes, Russian families’ incomes.

Again, increasing people’s real incomes is the key issue here. We must employ all economic policy measures, including further suppressing inflation. We have some competing figures here – inflation has increased, but real disposable incomes have also increased. So we need to do everything in our power to keep inflation down, suppress it, while real disposable incomes grow. We need to protect people from price spikes that hit people with low incomes the hardest.

You know that decisions have been made to increase the indexation of the minimum wage and the subsistence level. We did that, and social benefits and payments will also increase accordingly. However, this is certainly not enough. This is only the necessary minimum of what the state is obliged to do.

We need to work more on creating the right conditions for people to have a solid source of income. This includes reducing the costs of doing business, helping businesses free up capital to raise wages, to maintain existing jobs and create new ones. In the coming year, I ask you to place special emphasis on employment programmes for young people, as well as work more with the regions where unemployment is high due to regional specifics – you know what I am talking about, primarily single-industry towns. To address this, we need targeted and weighted solutions for each specific region that is struggling with this problem.

In general, it is important to move from emergency anti-crisis support measures to system-wide steps to stimulate employment and business activity, to attract investment and technology to the Russian economy, to promising projects that should contribute to a decent and comfortable living in all regions of our country.

Colleagues,

I will not list all the tasks right now, all the challenges facing you, us, the Government, the Presidential Office and the President personally in the new year. There is a lot of work to do, and I am sure that each of you feels a personal responsibility for your entrusted area. At the same time, a team effort is most important in achieving a common result in the interests of the people, of our entire vast country.

Friends,

Once again, I thank you all for our joint work. I wish a very happy New Year to you, your colleagues, employees of the Government Staff, ministries, government agencies and all executive authority bodies.

I wish you good health, success and all the best in the New Year 2022.



////


Expanded Meeting of the Defence Ministry Board
Event_Date: 21/12/2021
Event_Time: 14:30
Event_Place: Moscow

Good afternoon, comrade officers,

Let us get down to work.

We have always prioritised and still prioritise the development of the Armed Forces and efforts to strengthen Russia’s defence capability, and we will continue to do this in the future.

Today, at the annual expanded meeting of the Defence Ministry Board, we will discuss what has been accomplished in the field of military development throughout 2021, what results have been achieved in the main areas, and, of course, we will chart future tasks. This is what we always do at the Board’s annual meetings.

I would like to note right away that, just like 2020, the outgoing year has been something extraordinary, mostly due to the continued coronavirus pandemic. You and I realise this. And it is of paramount importance that the Armed Forces efficiently and smoothly accomplish all of their tasks in this challenging context.

For example, work continued on the modernisation of the Army and Navy on a grand scale. Consequently, the share of modern weapons exceeded 71 percent in the troops and 89 percent in the strategic nuclear forces.

We continued to actively develop cutting-edge weapons systems. Some of them, namely the Avangard and Kinzhal systems, have been put on combat duty.

The Navy accomplished a wide range of tasks. Russian ships and submarines constantly patrolled all important sectors of the world’s oceans. A combined naval grouping and long-range aviation units successfully accomplished combat-training tasks in the Baltic and Northern seas and in remote areas of the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. A group of submarines and other ships did the same in the Arctic Ocean, operating in difficult ice conditions.

I also want to note a further increase in the level of troops’ combat training. The results of the Zapad 2021 joint strategic exercises have shown this convincingly as the participants successfully practiced accomplishing the tasks of ensuring the security of the Union State of Russia and Belarus.

Our military members in Syria acted honourably, as befits Russian soldiers. Their presence and assistance to the civilian population in solving humanitarian problems is making a tangible contribution to strengthening stability in that republic.

Our peacekeepers have been helping to maintain stability in Nagorno-Karabakh for over a year now. Largely thanks to their efforts, the humanitarian situation has improved in the region; several districts have been demined, the social infrastructure has been restored, and historical and cultural landmarks have been preserved. I would like to thank the personnel performing peacekeeping tasks for their professionalism, endurance and perseverance.

Military doctors deserve the highest praise for their hard work in difficult conditions, for their invaluable help to the civilian population: more than 30,500 patients have been treated at the Defence Ministry’s medical facilities, almost half of them civilians.

Military doctors have helped the civilian population in nine regions fight the coronavirus; they have even helped with the rehabilitation of patients who have suffered moderate or severe cases of the coronavirus infection and continue doing it. People continue to undergo rehabilitation treatment at 32 Defence Ministry health centres. Thank you.

I would like to emphasise that the army itself has taken the necessary measures to combat the spread of the coronavirus in its ranks. Almost 100 percent of military personnel have been vaccinated. This made it possible to stem the tide of infection and protect service members’ health, thereby ensuring high combat readiness among army units and divisions. True, the army has suffered from the coronavirus; there have been severe cases and losses – non-combat casualties. But overall, the Armed Forces have dealt with this problem successfully.

The military construction force has been operating with high efficiency. I am referring to more than building a significant amount of infrastructure for the army and navy on time. The military builders have also helped to ensure uninterrupted water supply to Crimea and Sevastopol. They have also helped build multifunctional medical centres and other socially significant facilities in many regions.

Comrade officers,

Relying on the solid foundation and a powerful research and technology achievements of the past few years, we must definitely continue to improve and strengthen our Armed Forces, which is exactly what we will do.

The military political situation in the world remains complicated, with increased conflict potential and new seats of tension in several regions. In particular, the growth of the US and NATO military forces in direct proximity to the Russian border and major military drills, including unscheduled ones, are a cause for concern.

It is extremely alarming that elements of the US global defence system are being deployed near Russia. The Mk 41 launchers, which are located in Romania and are to be deployed in Poland, are adapted for launching the Tomahawk strike missiles. If this infrastructure continues to move forward, and if US and NATO missile systems are deployed in Ukraine, their flight time to Moscow will be only 7–10 minutes, or even five minutes for hypersonic systems. This is a huge challenge for us, for our security.

In this context, as you are aware, I invited the US President to start talks on the drafting of concrete agreements. Incidentally, during our conversation he actually proposed appointing senior officials to oversee this sphere. It was in response to his proposal that we drafted our proposals on precluding the further eastward expansion of NATO and the deployment of offensive strike systems in the countries bordering on Russia. As you are aware, we have sent the drafts of relevant agreements to our American colleagues and the NATO leadership.

We need long-term legally binding guarantees. Well, we know very well that even legal guarantees cannot be completely fail-safe, because the United States easily pulls out of any international treaty that has ceased to be interesting to it for some reason, sometimes offering explanations and sometimes not, as was the case with the ABM and the Open Skies treaties – nothing at all.

However, we need at least something, at least a legally binding agreement rather than just verbal assurances. We know the worth of such verbal assurances, fine words and promises. Take the recent past, in the late 1980s and early 1990s, when we were told that our concerns about NATO’s potential expansion eastwards were absolutely groundless. And then we saw five waves of the bloc’s eastward expansion. Do you remember how it happened? All of you are adults. It happened at a time when Russia’s relations with the United States and main member states of NATO were cloudless, if not completely allied.

I have already said this in public and will remind you of this again: American specialists were permanently present at the nuclear arms facilities of the Russian Federation. They went to their office there every day, had desks and an American flag. Wasn’t this enough? What else is required? US advisors worked in the Russian Government, career CIA officers gave their advice. What else did they want? What was the point of supporting separatism in the North Caucasus, with the help of even ISIS – well, if not ISIS, there were other terrorist groups. They obviously supported terrorists. What for? What was the point of expanding NATO and withdrawing from the ABM Treaty?

They are to blame for what is happening in Europe now, for the escalation of tensions there. Russia had to respond at every step, and the situation was continuously going from bad to worse. It was deteriorating all the time. And here we are today, in a situation when we are forced to resolve it: After all, we cannot allow the scenario I mentioned. Is anyone unable to grasp this? This should be clear.

Sometimes I wonder: Why did they do all this in the then conditions? This is unclear. I think the reason lies in the euphoria from the victory in the so-called Cold War or the so-called victory in the Cold War. This was due to their wrong assessment of the situation at that time, due to their unprofessional, wrong analysis of probable scenarios. There are simply no other reasons.

I would like to emphasise again: we are not demanding any special exclusive terms for ourselves. Russia stands for equal and indivisible security in the whole of Eurasia.

Naturally, as I have already noted, if our Western colleagues continue their obviously aggressive line, we will take appropriate military-technical reciprocal measures and will have a tough response to their unfriendly steps. And, I would like to stress that we are fully entitled to these actions that are designed to ensure Russia’s security and independence.

As we know well, they are operating thousands of kilometres away from their national territory under different pretexts, including the need to ensure their own security. When international law and the UN Charter get in their way, they declare them obsolete and unnecessary. However, when something meets their interests, they immediately refer to the norms of international law, the UN Charter, international humanitarian law and so on. These manipulations are annoying.

In this connection, as I have already said, it is important to continue planned, steady, systemic development of the Armed Forces, including in line with their priorities, set forth in the latest version of the National Security Strategy and the Concept for Building and Developing the Armed Forces through to 2030.

Next year, we will have to focus on the following main tasks.

First, it is necessary to continue the planned and well-balanced procurement of modern weapons and equipment for military units and to devote special attention to deliveries of high-precision systems, cutting-edge reconnaissance, navigation, communications and control systems.

Second, combat and tactical training programmes should prioritise efforts to master modern weaponry, as well as new forms and methods of combat operations. In this connection, combat training programmes should be modified, so that they can be taken into account during exercises next year, including the Vostok 2022 strategic command post exercise.

Third, all-out success in many spheres now directly depends on well-thought-out and rapid decision-making. In the military sphere, during combat operations, decisions are made in minutes or even seconds. It is therefore necessary to develop systems to support the decision-making process by commanders at all levels, especially at the tactical level, and to introduce elements of artificial intelligence into these systems.

Fourth, it goes without saying that effective operational algorithms should be established at all levels, and advanced automatic systems should also be introduced. At the same time, we can see that modern military conflicts do not take place under pre-set patterns. As before, commanders play a key role in these conflicts. A lot depends on their knowledge, experience, personal qualities, and those who make truly unconventional decisions win battles. Consequently, during operational and combat training, it is necessary to train versatile commanders who possess knowledge in all fields. They should be listed in the personnel pool of top military commanders, and it is necessary to keep an eye on them even now, to guide them and to provide them with opportunities for subsequent promotion.

And, finally, here is the fifth aspect. Given the complicated international situation, it is necessary to develop military and military-technical cooperation with states that are members of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation and the Collective Security Treaty Organisation and to pay special attention to strengthening the defence capability of the Russia-Belarus Union State.

Colleagues,

One of our absolute priorities is to increase the level of social guarantees for the military personnel. Defenders of the Motherland perform special tasks which are often highly complicated, demanding and perilous. We will make sure that they are duly rewarded for their service.

As in the previous years, the military allowance must be equivalent and even higher than the wages in the leading industries. We agreed on this with the Government several years ago.

For your information, we have managed to maintain this correlation. According to forecasts, the average wage across the economy as of the end of the year will be 55,000 rubles and the average wage in the leading industries (oil, finance and transport) will be 63,200 rubles. According to my data (the Finance Ministry’s numbers are slightly higher), the Defence Ministry’s average military allowance for lieutenants in 2021 is 81,200 rubles. The figure may differ as all lieutenants are different and serve differently – but the average level of compensation is 81,200 rubles while the leading industries show 63,200 rubles.

The Government must adjust the allowance for inflation and, of course, increase military pensions, in a timely manner and to the extent that will ensure that this correlation is maintained.

We continue to provide military personnel with permanent housing as planned. This year, 4,350 servicepeople purchased new flats using housing subsidies. In the course of the next three years, some 9,000 servicepeople will receive the subsidies. We plan to allocate around 113 billion rubles for this purpose from the federal budget.

The accumulative mortgage system continues to work effectively. Thanks to this programme, 15,000 military personnel have fulfilled their right to housing in 2021. Another 34,000 will obtain new housing in 2022–2024.

Service housing is provided at the same rate. Some 35,000 servicepeople will have obtained it by the end of the year, which is 14 percent higher than our plan.

We will continue to focus very closely on these and other issues concerning military personnel’s social security.

Finally, I would like to thank the leadership and staff of the Defence Ministry for their honest service and good performance. I am confident that you will continue to demonstrate professionalism and competence and use your best efforts to achieve high results. I wish you further success in your service for the benefit of Russia and our people.

Thank you.

On an informal note, I would like to add a few words to what the Minister said and what I said in my opening remarks. Everyone is discussing this and, of course, primarily the Armed Forces. I am referring to our documents, our draft treaties and agreements on ensuring strategic stability that we sent to the leadership of the United States and NATO.

We already see that some of our detractors are interpreting them as Russia’s ultimatum. Is it an ultimatum or not? Of course, not.

As a reminder: everything that our partners – let us call them that – the United States has been doing in previous years, supposedly ensuring its interests and security thousands of kilometres away from their national territory – they have been doing these tough things, the boldest things, without UN Security Council authorisation.

What was the pretext to bomb Yugoslavia? Was it authorised by the Security Council, or what? Where is Yugoslavia and where is the United States? They destroyed the country. Indeed, there was an internal conflict, they had their own problems, but who gave them the right to conduct airstrikes against a European capital? No one did. They just chose to do so, and their satellites were running behind them yelping along. So much for international law.

Under what pretext did they go into Iraq? It was Iraq developing weapons of mass destruction. They went in, destroyed the country, created a hotbed of international terrorism, and then it turned out that they made a mistake: “The intelligence failed us.” Wow! They destroyed a country. The intelligence failed – that is all they had to say to justify their actions. It turned out there were no weapons of mass destruction there. On the contrary, everything had been destroyed as agreed.

How did they go into Syria? With Security Council authorisation? No. They do as they please. However, what they are doing, or trying or planning to do in Ukraine, is not happening thousands of kilometres away from our national border. It is on the doorstep of our house. They must understand that we simply have nowhere further to retreat to.

There are experts here, sitting with us, I stay in constant contact with them. The United States does not possess hypersonic weapons yet, but we know when they will have it. It cannot be hidden. Everything goes on record, successful or unsuccessful tests alike. We have a sense of when it might happen. They will supply hypersonic weapons to Ukraine and then use them as cover – that does not mean that they will start using them tomorrow, because we already have Tsircon and they do not – to arm extremists from a neighbouring state and incite them against certain regions of the Russian Federation, such as Crimea, when they think circumstances are favourable.

Do they really think we do not see these threats? Or do they think that we will just stand idly watching threats to Russia emerge? This is the problem: we simply have no room to retreat. That is the question.

Armed conflicts and bloodshed are absolutely not our choice. We do not want to see events go that way. We want to use political and diplomatic means to resolve problems but we want to at least have clearly formulated legal guarantees. This is what our proposals are all about. We set them down on paper and sent them to Brussels and Washington, and we hope to receive a clear and comprehensive response to these proposals.

There are certain signals that our partners appear to be willing to work on that. However, there is also a danger that they will attempt to drown our proposals in words, or in a swamp, in order to take advantage of this pause and do whatever they want to do.

To make it clear to everyone: we are aware of this, and this turn of events, these developments, will not work for us. We look forward to constructive and meaningful talks with a visible outcome – and within a definite timeframe – that would ensure equal security for all.

This is what we will strive to achieve, but we can do so only if the Armed Forces are developing properly. In recent years, we have been able to manage this, and we have achieved a good level of combat readiness. I mentioned this, and the Minister has just reported about it. We are moving forward at a decent pace – the kind of pace that we need.

There are matters that need more attention, such as the production side, which we deal with on an ongoing basis. As you may be aware, we meet in Sochi twice a year. Why Sochi? It is not because of the good weather, but because everyone is going there, and we tune out distractions such as routine matters and focus on the defence industry and the development of the Armed Forces. These meetings are quite meaningful and effective.

To reiterate, there are many questions, but we are on top of them. I very much hope that we will continue to keep up this pace as we move forward in our efforts to ensure the security of Russia and its citizens.

Thank you very much. Happy New Year!



////



Meeting of the Agency for Strategic Initiatives Supervisory Board
Event_Date: 16/12/2021
Event_Time: 22:05
Event_Place: Moscow


Colleagues,

Today – we have just learned about the projects, and I will tell you about them later – but I would like to start by saying that today we are holding an important and, even in some sense, a special meeting of the Agency for Strategic Initiatives (ASI) Supervisory Board. The Agency should determine its goals and tasks for the next three years and record the key areas of its work, which should logically continue its entire history. I would like to start with its landmarks.

A decade ago, in December 2011, the Agency was instructed to implement the National Business Initiative. Its efforts produced not only up-to-date regulations and procedures for doing business that were new and more effective.

The changes proved to be much more profound. The regions saw more managers that make decisions with due account for the interests and requirements of people doing their own business.

Supporting ideas and individual projects, you have always striven for proactive, systemic changes. When I say “you,” I am primarily addressing the Agency as such. Thus, the WorldSkills championships have actually developed into a nationwide movement in Russia, new programmes of vocational training and a broad network of additional education for children, very often in the professions of the future.

I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the WorldSkills junior section and the team of the Boiling Point project on winning Knowledge Society prizes for their outstanding educational activities.

I believe these prizes are evidence of the contribution by the entire Agency to promoting advanced approaches and views, and to uniting around common values a large community of people that are ready to see changes and get involved in developing their cities, regions and the entire country.

It was important to carry out this work. It is being carried out now as well, as I see from the projects that we reviewed, and is focused on uniting people who are passionate about a particular cause. These people are entrepreneurs, researchers, people from the non-profit sector and creative industries and, of course, young people.

I have no doubt that during this new, equally dazzling and effective stage of the Agency's future development, its key mission, which is to engage citizens in achieving our national development goals, should remain unchanged. It is imperative to help them realise their ideas and initiatives.

Now, as we know, the Agency has over 4.5 million like-minded partners in Russia. I know that in three years the Agency plans to more than double this community to 10 million people. This is already a large “army.”

Most importantly, these should not be perfunctory numbers or some kind of indicators, but a really powerful community, a force made of energetic people capable of making a meaningful contribution to the general national agenda.

In this regard, I would like to note that with the participation of VEB – I see the head of VEB on one of these screens – a comprehensive mechanism for implementing civil projects will be created, and the Powerful Ideas for New Times forum will become a permanent platform for collecting meaningful and constructive proposals. By the way, I propose holding this forum in the first quarter of 2022.

Next, and I already mentioned this, we had a chance to see at the exhibition how the digital platform, which brings together best regional practices, works. They have proven effective in helping people resolve everyday problems.

I want the relevant State Council commissions to team up with the Agency and build an effective system for spreading the management teams’ experience locally. During our tour of the projects, we heard many requests to ask the Government, to instruct the Government, to develop in conjunction with the Government – in a word, it is necessary to include the most important decisions in national projects and state programmes, including in the sphere of infrastructure improvements.

(Addressing General Director of the Agency for Strategic Initiatives Svetlana Chupsheva.) I hope, Svetlana, that you and I will not forget the words the young people said at the exhibition, and their proposals will need to be summarised and properly drafted in the form of instructions.

Of course, it is important to share your best practices and be open to new ideas. Again, I am saying this to the Agency. It is important to form teams and bring onboard like-minded people from our country and other countries as well. I see that this work is underway, which is good

I know that Boiling Point is already underway in Kazakhstan. I would like to hear from you about other plans to expand international cooperation and projects at the global level, because this entails access to the markets of third countries, which invariably increases the competitive environment, which means that ultimately it will increase competitiveness as well.

A whole ecosystem, as they say now, has formed around the Agency, which brings together initiatives in the social sphere, nature conservation, personnel training, and the development of advanced technology.

Here is what I would like to emphasise. All our state work and the Agency's work should, of course, revolve around people and their well-being. We have just reviewed a project which does exactly that: it puts in the centre the individual with their interests, requests, plans, etc. Of course, in fact, every project should be lined up this way. These goals should be linked together and run across all programmes and projects.

The Agency must concentrate on its activities in the regions, help local management teams achieve visible changes at schools, outpatient clinics, hospitals, social protection institutions, and to take into account the residents’ requests and suggestions. As a matter of fact, this is how things are, and I hope not only on paper, but in real life as well.

By the way, much depends on the Government here. We have just now talked about free school meals and so on, and also about amendments to the current legislation. We will need to work on this later.

I also expect the ASI to make a substantial contribution to the establishment of the Federation of New Development Centres in the regions, the development of a modern urban environment and the promotion of national technologies and the so-called green technology, the environmentally friendly solutions in energy and construction, including within the framework of your new system-wide project, the National Environmental Initiative.

In this context I would like to point out (I see that members of the Presidential Executive Office and Government ministers are attending this meeting) that our colleagues who presented their projects have asked us to amend the law to add industrial waste, including construction waste, to the regions’ competence, because they would be unable to regulate these activities otherwise. There is much to do in that sphere, and the regions are ready to do it, whereas now they are only responsible for general waste. They have no control over construction waste, and so they cannot address the issue quickly or properly. I see that the Economic Development Minister is taking notes. I would like to thank him and to express the hope that we will follow this issue to its logical end.

As we agreed, we will keep an eye on the indicators of the national quality of life rating. The ASI initiative on assessing the integral results and the regional teams’ efforts to improve the quality of life is very important and we must support it. During the St Petersburg International Economic Forum last summer, we discussed the first tentative results of this project. Today we will take a look at the situation in individual regions based on the analysis of the available data.

Next, one of the Agency’s major tasks is to help people in all age groups to find their place in the changing technological world. The main thing here is to ensure that learning new skills and competencies increases the people’s real income. It is in accordance with this logic that the Agency should launch convenient learning formats, including for those who would like to start a business or work for themselves in the positive sense, that is, become independently employed.

I would also like to tell the Agency’s Youth Initiatives Centre that it should continue working to create a comprehensive modern environment for the development of children’s, youth, business and technology teams, especially considering that we know examples when teenagers, very young people indeed, want to run a business and start very successful businesses. There are some wonderful start-ups. Their goal for the first ten years of operation is not only to succeed in the national market but also to take their projects to international markets.

And lastly, another important goal is to work together with like-minded organisations to analyse and forecast the development of technologies and social projects and processes in the next 20–30 years and possibly in a longer term. This is very important for properly organising their own operation.

This vision of the future has a huge, applied importance already at the current stage in this rapidly changing world. It helps set the guidelines, reconsider some things, promptly respond to arising challenges and look at the current stage from a different perspective. It is a crucial job, including in terms of education. It is extremely important, and I am sure that the country and society need it.

Let us get down to the issues on our agenda today.



////



Meeting of the Council for Strategic Development and National Projects
Event_Date: 15/12/2021
Event_Time: 16:35
Event_Place: Novo-Ogaryovo_Moscow_Region


Colleagues, good afternoon.

As is traditional, the Council for Strategic Development and National Projects is meeting at the end of the year to review this year’s performance and discuss the details of what has been done to achieve the national goals – as a reminder, those are the main benchmarks for the country's development through to 2030.

I would like to note that, despite the unfavourable epidemiological situation, Russia has never stopped working on its national projects. Moreover, some of the indicators show that the dynamics and intensity have been, if anything, growing. Consider that in 2019, the first year of implementing these projects, cash spending on them was lagging behind – not much, but nevertheless – lagging compared to the execution of the general federal budget, but now these indicators have levelled off.

For reference, as of December 1, 2019, 78 percent of the federal budget was implemented, and spending on national projects accounted for 70 percent of the plan. As of December 1, 2021, 80 percent of spending on both the federal budget and national projects was executed.

Of course, for all the importance of budgetary discipline, using the funds intensively and sticking to the plan is not the only thing that matters – this, as we understand it, is just a tool for attaining the goal, and naturally, it should be made good use of. What matters most – and I will stress this again – are the results that have been achieved, how specific they are, how tangible and visible to people, how they affect the development of Russian regions and all territories across the country.

I am pleased to note that some results have been achieved. There are shortcomings as well – we will talk about them too, but we have seen results. I would like to note that the annual plan for the repair of the road network in urban complexes has been carried out; such conurbations are home to about a half of Russia’s citizens.

Overall, the relocation of people from dilapidated housing is proceeding ahead of schedule. In 10 months of 2021, 120,000 people moved to new modern apartments – as many as over the whole course of the two previous years.

Allow me to remind you that we will launch a new relocation programme very soon, in January 2022, which will embrace buildings that were recognised as dilapidated as of January 1, 2021. The money to finance the programme over the next two years, 45 billion rubles, has been included in the federal budget.

As for preschool education, some 180,000 places have been created at nurseries over the past few years. The queue for places at nurseries throughout the country has been halved, and the problem has been resolved completely in 31 regions. Virtually every family with children under three years can send their kids to a nursery there, if they want to.

However, there are not enough nursery places in several regions, where 73,500 kids are waiting for a place. This is just for your information. It is clear that we will eventually resolve this problem in accordance with our plans.

Free hot meals are provided to over 7 million primary school pupils. This is part of our systemwide efforts to support families with children. At present, targeted state assistance is provided to Russian families with some 7 million children. As I mentioned, our task for the next few years is to create a comprehensive system of assistance for families with children from birth to school graduation.

It should be said that some 800,000 people in difficult circumstances receive support under a social contract. The fight against poverty is a clear priority. We regularly discuss this issue, which is directly connected to our response to the demographic challenge.

Everything is important for increasing people’s incomes, including targeted social support, assistance for families with children, new jobs, which is a key element, balanced development of the regions and economic sectors, as well as improving the affordability and quality of education at all levels, which I have already mentioned.

We will accelerate the construction of new schools. Over the past three years, 271 schools for 177,000 pupils have been built in 78 regions. I would like to remind you that we plan to build another 1,300 schools by the end of 2024. In addition to this, in the next five years we will implement an ambitious programme of capital repairs and technical upgrades at existing schools, which will cover 7,300 buildings.

As for the teaching staff, over 800,000 schoolteachers and 100,000 advisors at vocational and technical schools will receive additional payment for class supervision and guidance. The work of classroom teachers and advisors is extremely important for educating our young people, for their personal and professional development and hence for the future of Russia.

The healthcare infrastructure is being upgraded. Since 2018, 1,750 paramedic centres and outpatient clinics have been put into service. The regions have received over 1,000 mobile medical complexes. As a result, the amount of medical assistance in rural areas has doubled.

Children’s outpatient clinics, oncological and cardio-vascular centres are being refurbished. Over 40,000 units of new medical equipment have been supplied to them under national projects.

I would like to add that over 350 outpatient oncological aid centres have been opened in the regions, while local patients prone to cardio-vascular diseases have been entitled to free medication since last year. This year about 600,000 people receive them.

I would like to add that national projects have produced one more result that is important for enhancing living standards in Russian cities, notably, the improvement of ecological well-being. We have set ourselves the task of eliminating 88 of the most dangerous facilities that have produced cumulative environmental damage by 2024. Sixty facilities of this kind have already been shut down and another six will be removed by the end of the year. Thirty unauthorised dumping sites within city limits have been also shut or recultivated. Another 12 must be removed by the end of the year.

I would like to emphasise that national projects are very important for Russian people. They should help enhance the welfare of Russian families, improve the urban environment, social sphere, and create new opportunities for businesses.

That said, it is very important to hear what people think about the changes brought about by national projects. We know that not everything is as smooth here as we would like it to be, as I said at the beginning of my speech. Unfortunately, problems do not go away.

I will repeat that the goal of every national project is not just to build a certain facility, put it into service or repair. We must learn to make national projects resolve people’s most sensitive issues. This is the main criterion of the effectiveness of our common performance.

The participants need to be involved in national projects, and they need to act responsibly and in earnest on a daily basis at the federal and regional levels. I urge our colleagues to constantly monitor the status of national projects and to analyse bottlenecks or failures to keep up with the schedule in order to be able to make additional decisions based on an objective situation, taking into account arising problems and difficulties.

So, this year, rising prices have become a major challenge in implementing national projects. Prices went up for a wide range of products, including construction materials. Faced with higher prices, governors and regional leaders are increasingly reporting failed competitive bidding, construction delays and problems with contractors.

I am not going to give you reference data regarding higher prices for reinforcement steel, sheet steel, bitumen and so on. You are well aware of them. These risks must be reduced as much as possible, better yet, nullified. The projects and sites planned under national projects must be completed.

I would like to emphasise again that we are talking not about the amounts of allocated or used funds, but about newly built kindergartens, schools and infrastructure facilities, renovated hospitals and paramedic centres, phased-out landfills, and the like.

The Government needs to prepare a clear-cut algorithm for actions regarding the federal and regional facilities under construction. Everyone participating in this work must understand what they need to do, and how this process will be funded.

Also, at one time, we had lively discussions concerning the proportionate participation of the federal and the regional budgets in funding national projects. As a result, specific agreements were reached, and it is important for these agreements to be strictly implemented by all participants in the current difficult circumstances.

This is what I wanted to say at the outset.

Let us get to work. We will then sum up our discussion, draw certain conclusions, and outline the next steps for the next year and in the longer term.

<…>

Vladimir Putin: Colleagues, a few words in conclusion.

First, I want to thank all of you. Yes, we spoke about problems, but overall work is underway in a consistent manner and at a good pace. The decisions and approaches that we discussed today – I just spoke about them in respect to a specific area – are of special importance for our country and our citizens. I am talking about national projects, the main tool for achieving the national development goals. We have done a lot already to implement these plans, and they are quite ambitious. This is obvious.

It is important to reinforce and continue positive trends in the economy, social sphere, in solving environmental problems and improving the quality of life of our citizens in order to reach real, more tangible and substantial results for each family in Russia, and for the country in general.

While implementing national projects, we are addressing complex tasks; there are difficulties and problem areas. Colleagues from the State Council commission, the Council’s working group for National Projects and the Russian Popular Front spoke about them; the chairman of the executive committee just spoke about them. I ask the Government to monitor the problem areas and include them in the agenda for the first half of 2022.

I also suggest we regularly review the implementation of national projects at meetings of the Council for Strategic Development presidium and hold reviews of project documents mostly in the in-person format with an open and detailed discussion.

While summarising the results of our meeting, I would like to go back to several issues.

As for construction. Mr Khusnullin suggested a detailed plan of action that would ensure the implementation of construction plans both at the federal and regional levels. It is crucially important that it covers the budget for the next three years, which means it will provide the necessary planning horizon and predictability for the regions and contractors. I support these initiatives and ask the Government to adopt decisions for their implementation in the near future.

At the same time, I repeat that the Government is directly responsible for the completion of the construction of not only federal, but also regional projects. There is no need to wait and blame our colleagues in the regions for not having finished something or done it at the wrong time. Help them, please. It is necessary to put their facilities into operation as scheduled. This is what we agreed on when we launched the national project.

Also, some colleagues mentioned earlier that the actual co-financing of national projects by the regions differs from the planned arrangements. We all understand that this is caused by higher prices. It is also obvious that the outline of work in each area and the list of objects are not always clearly defined. I ask the Government, together with the State Council commissions, to eliminate this so that all the co-financing agreements get fulfilled.

Now, about modernising primary healthcare. We must not lower the bar that we have set ourselves in terms of modernising healthcare infrastructure. This means that the spending in this area should be adjusted for inflation.

The pandemic has taken a heavy toll on public health around the world. Unfortunately, we are not an exception. In our country, it superimposed on the objective demographic trough. I think the right thing to do in the next two years will be to seriously step up work to strengthen primary healthcare. There is nothing unusual about it – these are our plans, which we have agreed upon long ago.

According to experts, we will shift the main costs involved in solving this problem a little to the left. I understand that many things have been arranged and determined, it is very difficult to do this but please work on this, so as not to wait for future budget periods, and invest already now in the business, in creating and re-equipping healthcare facilities and in building up their capabilities.

At the same time, I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the issue is about protecting people’s health – we understand very well what this is about. And the level of people’s satisfaction with the quality and availability of medical care is the main integral indicator of our work’s effectiveness, and here we need to achieve the greatest progress. So far, this figure has been quite modest, as you are aware. Nevertheless, I want to end with where I started: work is underway, and the pace is good.

Once again, I thank all the participants in our meeting today and, of course, I wish you and your colleagues success and a happy New Year.

Thank you. All the best.



////



Vladimir Putin held a meeting of the Council for Civil Society and Human Rights via videoconference.
Event_Date: 9/12/2021
Event_Time: 19:25
Event_Place: Novo-Ogaryovo_Moscow_Region

Good afternoon, colleagues.

It is a pleasure to see all of you.

We are meeting on the eve of Human Rights Day, which the entire world has been celebrating for over 70 years now. As a rule, we time meetings of our council to this remarkable date. However, you know well that you have to focus continuously on the protection of human rights and freedoms and keep them on the council’s agenda. Each of you is making a tangible contribution to what is truly a noble mission without any exaggeration.

I would like to convey my sincere greetings to you on the upcoming Human Rights Day and wish you success in your difficult but very important and much-needed work.

I would like to emphasise that our Council has one more equally important task. I am referring to the development of civil society. As we agreed two years ago, this task also requires special attention and hard work.

I am happy to note that now the Council is actively dealing with pressing problems that are causing concern in our society.

One of them is protecting people from financial fraud. Criminals have deprived tens of millions of people of their housing, literally leaving them out in the street. The Council persistently raised this issue and eventually amendments were introduced to the law on the activities of consumer credit co-operatives, banning the issuance of loans secured only by housing as collateral. This created a barrier in the way of fraudulent schemes of microcredit organisations.

I will now say what has been done as a result of the Council’s decisions or discussions on issues that really worry our people.

The next thing I would like to point out is that the Council has supported the owners of agricultural lands who had no right to maintain forests on their land plots. Facing huge fines, they had to destroy these forests. The Council’s view on that matter was taken into account as well, and the Forest Code has been amended to allow landowners to keep the forests, which has saved hundreds of hectares of forest.

Another solution to which the Council has contributed was to ensure the compliance of foreign IT companies operating in Russia with Russian legislation. It is no secret that there have been numerous cases of fraud, abuse of our citizens’ personal data and the distribution of illegal content, including content dangerous to children, on transnational online platforms. At the same time, people have nowhere to turn to with their complaints or to demand the restoration of their rights.

On July 1, 2021, we adopted a law stipulating that foreign IT companies must “land” in Russia. Despite its informal name, the law clearly stipulates that international companies working in the Russian segment of the internet must register in accordance with Russian law and open their offices here.

I would also like to mention a solution that concerns a small group of people but is extremely important for every one of them. It concerns children after a retinoblastoma operation. These children need to confirm their disability every year until they grow up to receive financial support for the prosthetic eye care – I remember how we discussed that matter and how our colleagues raised it. The issue has been settled following discussions at the Council, and now the disability certificate the children receive after surgery remains valid until they turn 18.

Our public is greatly concerned about and rightfully brings up issues of environmental protection. In fact, this is taking place all over the world, which we can see and are very well aware of. One of them concerns the gradual phasing out of disposable and intractable goods.

This is a global trend. Russia is also getting ready to fulfil this versatile, multi-faceted task. Traditionally paying much attention to environmental protection, your council has developed proposals and submitted them to the Government of the Russian Federation, which is now working on a corresponding draft law.

All these are examples of meaningful, constructive cooperation between civil society and government bodies on resolving pressing issues.

Once again: environmental issues, protection of social rights, and demographic problems are priorities of our national development strategy. It focusses on people and their requirements. Importantly, these areas play an important role in your work as well.

Colleagues,

As we know, life is not always serene and rosy, especially in our time, filled with new problems, challenges and even threats. In these conditions, a big role is played by the council’s efforts to get to the bottom of various high-profile cases, and include experts and representatives from civil society organisations in the analysis, those that are well familiar with the subjects being discussed.

In general, as I have said many times, you are often more sensitive to the needs of the people, and feel their mood better than even government officials do. You come up with your own approaches following an attentive and detailed analysis.

The council and its commissions announce their position during heated debates as well. Cases that have recently evoked a wide response in society are bound to be raised today. I know that you have analysed them, and your opinion is very important when adopting decisions on ensuring human rights.

I would like to end my opening remarks at this point. I know there are plenty of potential speakers among us, and those who announced their desire to speak in advance. As at our previous meetings, I will try to give the floor to as many of our colleagues as possible who want to speak on various matters. But by tradition, I would first like to hear Mr Valery Fadeyev.

Please, you have the floor.

(In his report, Chair of the Council for Civil Society and Human Rights Valery Fadeyev focused on the implementation of the presidential instructions issued a year ago, and on certain items on the current agenda. One of the items concerns the coronavirus pandemic and human rights, in particular, the use of QR-codes in public places and municipal transport. In addition, the issue was raised about enforcing the law on organisations that act as foreign agents, abuse of office and torture in the Federal Penitentiary Service system (FSIN), migration policy, protecting user rights and freedoms in the digital space, and a federal law under which foreign IT companies must open offices in Russia. The matter on benefits for holders of three Orders of Courage was brought up as well.)

Vladimir Putin: As far as I know, you outlined issues that were at the centre of the Council’s attention. I looked at the list of speakers. One way or another, most of these issues will be discussed separately. Therefore, there is probably no need to react to each of your issues now.

However, the last one about providing benefits for the holders of three Orders of Courage deserves, of course, not only to be worked though, but to be acted upon as soon as possible. I agree with you, and an instruction to this end will be issued to the Government shortly.

I am not sure we should be discussing QR-codes or foreign agent registration now. I am sure our colleagues will cover this later. Or, do I need to take these topics and… Then, I think the discussion will be over.

With regard to handling personal data, I fully share your concerns. I myself have spoken out on this many times, and I believe that we must give some thought to how we should organise it.

It is absolutely impossible to move forward without AI technology, which relies on big data, including personal data. We are aware of this, but there is a clear threat from the point of view of ensuring individual rights. The Government has received instructions to this end, and work is underway, even though it is not being conducted the way I, or apparently you, would like, because there are too many leaks. It is absolutely necessary to take proper steps to ensure individual interests and rights. The Government is focusing on this, and our colleagues are working on it, so I hope they will come up with corresponding proposals soon.

As for migration policy, this is one of the most important issues for both the economy and the social wellbeing of our people. You said there are no estimates on how much of a foreign workforce we need. This is not exactly true; estimates are being made, especially in construction. Deputy Prime Minister Marat Khusnullin has repeatedly reported to me on the needs of the construction industry, the construction sector of the economy, for foreign workers, but this is a separate issue.

I fully agree with those who have concerns in this context. Of course, we should cooperate with our colleagues, primarily from the CIS countries, on this. We should explain to those who want to work in our country that they need to prepare for this journey and for their jobs here. They should study the language, our laws and their rights; they should know what our public organisations and government bodies expect from them as regards the observance of the laws and rules of the Russian Federation, and the customs of the people in the territories where they will live.

I can say that we discuss this in considerable detail with our colleagues from the commonwealth countries. I had a conversation about this recently with Uzbekistan’s President during his visit to our country. He said Uzbekistan is also interested in preparing people who plan to move here. He noted that Uzbekistan’s government bodies are willing to promote this process. We are working on this with our other partners: Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan and Kazakhstan. This is why we keep this issue in the focus. This does not mean that everything has been accomplished in this respect. Quite the reverse; this is only the beginning.

As for the tracking of people by various companies, platforms and so on, I fully agree that it is necessary to put things in order there. I will not go into detail now to avoid taking up your time because I must give our other colleagues an opportunity to speak. That said, I fully share your concerns.

Maybe, let us move on and give our colleagues an opportunity to speak. Marina Akhmedova, please.

(Council member Marina Akhmedova spoke about the problems of the homeless and offered some proposals on resolving them.)

Vladimir Putin: Ms Akhmedova, you have raised a very sensitive issue.

I think that, listening to this, anyone born in the Soviet times would recall that we used to call the “ulcers of capitalism” that the socialist system did not have, or almost did not have. There were homeless people then but not so many. And, of course, every municipal or Government official is bound to be ashamed of what is happening in this country.

I think I said at the Valdai Club recently that classic capitalism is gradually disappearing in the international arena because it triggers too many differences and eventually brings itself down.

In our current life, in our reality, we should all feel ashamed when facing the problems you spoke about and the destroyed human destinies you described. We often talk about the bureaucratic callousness of officials but this is about individuals. We have many officials who are conscientious and scrupulous, who are responsible at what they are doing, but of course there are different approaches.

Meanwhile, the state should organise its work properly to be able to render assistance and support to people who have found themselves in such a difficult situation regardless of circumstances, regardless of why it happens. If a person lives on the street without means of subsistence, medical care or housing, this is certainly a special case that requires particular attention from the authorities. I fully agree with you.

Of course, it is necessary to work on everything you have mentioned: registration and registration through the government services website, and so on. But it is perfectly obvious that it is necessary to deal with this problem and deal with it more purposefully with a view to granting practical assistance to a specific person. This also probably concerns hospitals, and not just one or in one area.

Naturally, all these measures require funding. But what, exactly, do we need state funding for? We need it to resolve these urgent problems; these are our people, our citizens. Therefore, we will certainly deal with this, and the Government will receive relevant instructions. It would be great if this problem were resolved as soon as possible, but we will have to plan and monitor the pace of this effort as well. I would also like to ask you not to quit this work.

Of course, it is very important to cooperate with NGOs in this respect, no doubt about this, and with religious organisations as well. I know that all our traditional religions are involved in this work in one way or another. They are helping people, and it is necessary to encourage this as much as possible, to develop cooperation with them and support them in this effort.

Thank you very much. I have made a note for myself. We will work on this.

Eva Merkacheva, go ahead please.

(In her remarks, Council member Eva Merkacheva talked about violations in the Federal Penitentiary Service of Russia, including violence towards inmates and torture, reports of which have recently appeared on the internet. She reported on the initiative to introduce amendments to the Criminal Code by adding a separate chapter on torture. Merkacheva also spoke about the large numbers of people in pretrial detention centres, the use of modern technology and tracking methods instead of detention, the creation of correction centre, and equipping prison hospitals.)

Vladimir Putin: This is certainly a very important problem. Of course, I followed what was going on and read this information. We must get to the bottom of it.

The Central Office of the Investigative Committee is conducting a preliminary inquiry into the issues that have become public and are now being reviewed as part of the criminal cases that have been opened.

But, of course, I agree with you that it is necessary to take system-wide measures that would change the situation. Everything you mentioned definitely needs to be very carefully analysed, after which relevant measures can be adopted.

I would like to inform you that, first, the Federation Council has already started introducing amendments to the legislation that actually define the crime of torture. This work is underway. In any event, the Federation Council has raised this issue and is working on it.

Now about other restrictions on freedom – not only detention, especially pretrial detention. Of course, the Ministry of Justice will receive support, and work on the draft federal law on probation will be expedited. These are obvious things – house arrest and the bracelets you mentioned. Everything should be done to monitor a person suspected of committing a crime. But before a court concludes whether the crime was committed or not, there are certainly no grounds at all for putting a person behind bars, in a cell. I assure you that I fully agree with you.

As for compulsory labour, I also think it is possible to broaden the use of this option in sentence enforcement. I would just like to note that this instruction has already been given to the Government and, moreover, the Government has endorsed the concept for developing the penal and correctional system of the Russian Federation up to 2030. One of its main areas is broader use of compulsory labour. Work is underway on all these issues and will be stepped up after our today’s meeting, while relevant instructions will be adjusted accordingly.

Thank you very much. No doubt, this is a very important issue for all of us. Such things are absolutely unacceptable. What is there to say? You are saying the right things. It is necessary to work on this consistently and get results.

<…>

(Irina Borovova raised the issue of observing human rights during the COVID-19 vaccination campaign and introduction of electronic certificates and QR codes according to the bill that the State Duma is considering at the moment. She specifically drew attention to cancer patients. Irina Borovova also thanked the President for the Fighting Cancer programme.)

Vladimir Putin: Ms Borovova, as for the Fighting Cancer programme, it is one of our top priorities in public healthcare exactly because this disease poses a significant threat to a great number of our citizens. It is what we have been working on together, including with representatives of the medical community. This programme is the result of our collaboration with you and your colleagues.

It is important that this programme receive the necessary funding on time and in full. Judging from what I see, it will happen. These funds must be spent efficiently. This is the first point.

Second, concerning vaccination certificates, as you know they only serve as proof of vaccination. We also know that almost all countries have chosen the same path, all countries without exception that have the opportunity to vaccinate their people. Still, we have to proceed very carefully, weigh out every step and understand what is happening. The entire procedure must be perfectly clear and transparent. It must not create any additional problems for people.

There is more to it, though. Some people are opposed to vaccination and object to any restrictions. And those who support vaccination receive jabs and demand, including from officials in their regions, that they be guarded from the unvaccinated. You see, there are certain issues in society that also need to be addressed. At any rate, we must make decisions carefully.

I agree with you that before introducing any restrictions on public transport, we must fully consider the consequences and check if the transport system is ready. We must not restrict people’s rights, on the one hand, while ensuring their security and safety. Therefore, before we issue any final decisions, they must be exhaustively discussed.

This law is, to a great extent, a framework law. Of course, it still needs to be thoroughly reviewed by regional officials as they will be granted significant authority with respect to final decisions. I hope that will be the approach we take. I mean that we will, in cooperation with the professional community, find a solution that can guarantee the rights of all citizens.

Thank you. We will work on this extremely carefully and make sure that no hasty decisions are made.

<…>

(In his remarks, Kirill Kabanov focused on violence among teenagers and young adults, noting that negative and aggressive behavioural scenarios are being widely broadcast in the digital space, online communities and teenage groups, and emphasised that this negative and dangerous behaviour infiltrated Russia from the West and its culture. Kabanov suggested a number of measures to prevent this, including raising the professional level of teachers, creating school mechanisms for eliminating conflicts and reinforcing state bodies’ efforts to prevent juvenile delinquency.)

Vladimir Putin: I think everyone understands that you touched on a very important and sensitive matter that worries everyone without exaggeration.

The bullying you mentioned and the promotion of Western culture, although this has nothing to do with culture, in our society, and these behaviour patterns are often promoted by social media.

Western parliamentarians are now actively discussing the impact of these international platforms on the minds of younger people and their personal development, and their negative impact on the psyche of teenagers and children. We, too, should step up and take a closer look at that. Europe is paying much attention to this, and the United States is beginning to raise these issues at public or parliamentary platforms.

So, the issue that Mr Kabanov raised is extremely important. Of course, it requires a comprehensive approach which is what this proposal is all about as far as I can see.

Of course, I agree that the proposals regarding preventive measures should be considered and supported. This includes additional measures, such as introducing educators who are now becoming available at schools, and more should become available, training and retraining of teachers, and so on. We must implement and improve measures to prevent juvenile delinquency in the broadest sense of the word. Of course, we should proceed with caution given the young age of the people we are talking about, but we must do it nonetheless. I fully agree. We will work on this.

<…>

(Pavel Gusev spoke about the law on foreign agents in the media, which he described as one of the most controversial laws, listed its shortcomings and proposed creating a separate working group with the participation of corresponding parliamentary committees, journalist unions, and the Council for Civil Society and Human Rights in order to deal with the issues that are haunting media outlets recognised as foreign agents.)

Vladimir Putin: Thank you very much, Mr Gusev.

Here is what I would like to say. Of course, the incidents that you cited are comical, and the overreaction you noted is obvious.

Of course, we should pay attention to what you said, including the way this document was drafted, meaning that it was not discussed with the professional community. We must do more than just note this. This work must be done and we must see how it works and what it leads to.

However, Mr Gusev, you are well aware of how our media are being treated in foreign countries. They are declared foreign agents, summoned to courts, called in for questioning and face imprisonment if they do not show up.

You and I have known each other well for a long time now, and we understand what this is about. We must ensure freedom of speech and, to a certain extent, the inviolability of people who talk about the flaws of our society, the imperfections of our state apparatus and the governance system, and questions that arise during election campaigns. No doubt about it. What we need to do though is protect ourselves from potential external interference in our domestic affairs. We need to protect ourselves from anyone using any kind of tool in Russia to pursue their goals that have nothing to do with our interests. This is what we are talking about.

Of course, this is a delicate job. When it comes to the media, we need to proceed with caution so as not to “de-energise” or “blunt” the tools that we absolutely need to uphold our own interests, to move our country forward, and to develop democratic institutions, as well as to make our society and economy more competitive as well as to be able to move forward. To reiterate, we must prevent the use of any tool that would ultimately get in the way of our development or lead to the destruction of our country and our society. We need to be subtle and proceed with caution.

I agree with what you said. Let’s get back to this issue together with the professional community and develop, as far as practicable, concerted decisions. I do not think I need to go into detail now since you are aware of my position; I tried to express it again just now. We will be moving along this path.

Thank you for bringing this to our attention.



////


Meeting on economic issues
Event_Date: 7/12/2021
Event_Time: 17:50
Event_Place: Sochi

Colleagues,

Today I would like to revisit the topic that we discussed a week ago at VTB Capital Russia Calling! Investment Forum. I am referring to the current situation in the Russian economy.

I would like to note that recent economic trends have been generally positive. After ten months of this year, as you know, Russia’s gross domestic product grew by 4.6 percent. This is not the fastest growth in the world, you are well aware of this, but it is not the slowest either, and given today’s circumstances, for the Russian economy, this is a good indicator.

Investment added 7.6 percent over three quarters of 2021, which is also good. Please note that this is happening – just as the volume of lending in the economy has not decreased either (Maxim Oreshkin reported all this data to me today) – despite the increase in the Central Bank's key interest rate.

Employment in Russia has reached 72.3 million people, which corresponds to the second half of the pre-COVID year 2019. We still have many unresolved problems, including some new ones we will need to address. Nevertheless, I must note that the Government’s primary task this year – to revive the labour market – has been completed.

As for the coming year, I would like to highlight a number of tasks the Government and the Bank of Russia will need to specifically focus on.

First, rising inflation, which was 8.4 percent as of late November, is the main problem plaguing the economy and consumers. It is imperative to bring inflation back to the benchmark level of 4 percent in 2022.

What do I consider important here? I mentioned that prices are going up all over the world. We are well aware of this. The main reason for this is the extremely soft budgetary policy in a number of developed economies.

With that in mind, we must implement effective mechanisms to counter inflation. Please focus on increasing the supply of goods, primarily food, and services in the domestic market. The Government is taking strong measures; I hope they will be effective like they were in other areas earlier. Among other things, the production and supply of meat, sugar and vegetables should significantly increase in 2022.

Second, it is necessary to increase real disposable individual incomes at a rate that is not lower than the estimated level, that is, not lower than 2.5 percent. I mean real inflation-adjusted incomes.

We have agreed to expand the Government measures to support the people as more financial opportunities become available based on federal budget resources, which look good now and in the long term, for the next year. Today, I expect to hear your proposals on an economic policy that will make it possible to achieve sustainable real growth of wages and entrepreneurial revenue.

With regard to the growth of real wages, we see positive dynamics, but of course, we must monitor this situation very carefully and maintain these dynamics.

Third, as I mentioned at the Russia Calling! forum, our strategic goal regarding the growth of individual incomes, the implementation of national projects and programmes is to ensure long-term sustainable economic growth, or as your colleagues, analysts, say, to increase potential growth rates.

I want the Government to analyse the main factors that hold back the long-term growth of the economy and propose additional measures to speed it up. It is important to maintain high rates of economic growth going forward.

I want to note that this task will have to be addressed amid the challenging circumstances of the pandemic and the spread of a new coronavirus variant, even though some say, it is not as bad as the previous one and some experts even call it a “living vaccination.” But let’s not get ahead of ourselves. In any case, the markets have rebounded, and fears about the new variant have turned out to be premature. Still, we must proceed based on our experience of the previous 18 months. We are aware of the pitfalls, and I think we have a pretty good idea of what they can do to the economy. I look forward to hearing your reports on this matter soon.

Let’s move on to the proposed agenda.



////



Meeting on coal industry in Kuzbass
Event_Date: 2/12/2021
Event_Time: 16:40
Event_Place: The_Kremlin_Moscow


Colleagues, good afternoon.

As we all know very well, last week – on November 25 – a tragedy, a big disaster, happened in the Kemerovo Region. An accident at the Listvyazhnaya mine killed miners and rescuers. This is a tragedy and pain shared by Kuzbass and the entire country, all of Russia.

I would like to once again offer my condolences and words of support to the victims’ families and friends. I wish a speedy recovery to all the injured.

All these days we stayed in close contact with the region’s governor, Sergei Tsivilev, who heads the emergency response centre. Regular updates also come from the Emergencies Ministry leadership.

As you know, senior officials of the Emergencies Ministry and Rostekhnadzor travelled to the region immediately, and, of course, federal agencies received instructions to provide help and assistance to the families of those killed and injured.

We all must keep a close eye on the situation.

Today I would like to ask you to report on what has already been done and what must be done by the Government and other authorities. Above all, of course, we are talking about medical assistance for the injured: how many are already out of the hospital and how many remain there, are there enough medicines and medical equipment, is any additional assistance required from federal medical centres? I know that, according to preliminary reports, nothing seems to be needed, but, nevertheless, I would like you to report on this additionally.

I would like to ask the Government and local authorities to take care of everyone who had to face this disaster, families and friends of the victims, and to carefully consider every case. Personal and family situations may differ – I know this very well from the past tragic events – we cannot be guided solely by instructions on paper here.

During our meeting, I expect to hear a report on how federal payments are being made to families who have lost their loved ones, as well as to the injured, what has been done and is being done in the region.

Of course, we must investigate all the causes and circumstances of the accident. The relevant instructions have been given to the General Prosecutor’s Office. I would like to hear how they are being implemented today.

As reported, according to the preliminary data, the accident happened due to an entire range of safety violations. The region’s administration has already issued instructions to inspect all the mines in the region and analyse their fire safety condition, including the availability and serviceability of sensors showing methane concentration in the air.

It is well known that miners’ work involves higher risk. At the same time, it is unacceptable to abuse and exploit the courage of people who descend into mines. Their lives and health must be protected, and this is the personal responsibility of everyone who is involved in organising extraction: heads of enterprises, representatives of oversight and supervisory bodies, and owners.

Those who, in pursuit of profit or for some other reason, ignore, neglect the safety of people and expose them to mortal danger, must be punished according to the law, harshly, and held responsible for compliance with safety rules in mines and at all facilities of the mining industry, as well as for the proper condition of equipment and personal rescue equipment.

Today we will examine the implementation of the decisions made 11 years ago after the gravest accident, the tragedy at the Raspadskaya mine. Back then, we talked about systemic work to ensure safety at coal-mining enterprises, and today we will analyse these issues. However, it is clear that additional steps are needed here, including economic ones.

Of course, after these decisions were made back in 2010, I was updated on how the instructions were implemented. We must look at how they have been implemented, what has been done and how. Let us get down to this.

<…>

Vladimir Putin: Here is what I would like to say. After all, safety is tied to the work compensation scheme. I have returned to this issue several times today. In 2010, we agreed that the semi-fixed pay had to account for at least 70 percent of the wages. We also agreed to clearly define what is included in these 70 percent.

I would like to remind you about the federal industrial agreement on the coal industry for 2019–2021. It has been mentioned today. Clause 3.2.18 states, “Employers shall ensure that the semi-fixed pay amounts to at least 70 percent of the miners’ wages.” And it may seem fine but it only seems so. If we look at the breakdown, what makes up this semi-fixed pay?

According to labour law, the semi-fixed pay may also include payment based on piece rates such as overtime piecework. What does it mean? It means that in reality, the miners’ compensation depends on the amount of coal they produce. The semi-fixed pay also includes extra pay above the piece rates and monthly wages for working in hazardous conditions, which is very important. Hazard pay is very important. Those who wrote this knew very well what it means.

As a result, these terms create economic stimuli for the miners to disregard safety requirements – and they cannot be blamed for that. They take risks because they need to provide for their families. And our job is to create conditions in which they would not have to take risks. That was the point of our decisions back in 2010.

Therefore, obviously, it is necessary to clarify what is included in the semi-fixed component of the miners’ wages and exclude any pay that depends on productivity. This is what must be done. It is no time to consider the owners’ profits, or exports, or any other kind of profit. We must think about safety and people’s lives. They must be at the centre of our decisions.

Of course, liability for safety violations must be toughened. This is absolutely obvious. And it is important to expand the influence of trade unions. There is nothing to fear here.

The punishment for violations currently includes administrative penalties but there is no administrative suspension as a punishment. I remember from our discussion in 2010 that the fear was that trade unions would suspend operations here and there. They will not do that. Miners need to work and earn a living. Why would the trade unions suspend operations at the slightest opportunity? They will not.

Therefore, it is necessary to clarify the liability for violating gas drainage requirements and specify administrative penalties. This measure is absolutely necessary.

Of course, we should go back. I recall the discussions about the owners’ financial responsibility. I realise what this is about, no one wants to undermine the foundations of business and to downsize the coal industry’s operations. But we certainly have to think about this, and I agree with the trade union leader here. We have to resume this discussion in a calm and cautious manner, without any emotions linked with the current developments and today’s tragedy; but we need to analyse all this painstakingly.

The same must be done with regard to audits of the use of mineral deposits. I have just said that I want to discuss this matter once again. There is no desire to increase administrative barriers, and we are reducing them, as well as opportunities for bribery. Of course, it is necessary to fight this evil. But it is necessary to maintain safety, too. We need to monitor mining operations, design, technological and production documents and records, and their compliance with specific standards. We must do this, no matter what, and it would be better if independent agencies, not linked with owners, conducted such work. By the way, it would be possible to select audit companies together with the trade unions.

The Minister spoke earlier about a programme for shutting down mines. We need to address this matter very cautiously. Indeed, the Minister said that this applied to a small number of enterprises; however, this also means jobs. But it goes without saying that we will have to deal with this matter at facilities with hazardous working conditions where this danger is too great for some other reasons, including technological or some other factors. Of course, life is life.

In this connection, I would like to raise the issue of liquidation funds. We stipulate the creation of liquidation funds for high-risk enterprises, and we can think about creating such funds for mines, too. I would like to ask you to consider this and to submit appropriate proposals during preparations for the second reading of the relevant bill, which is currently being considered, and to extend them to coal mines and open-cast mines.

Now, I would like to say a few words about mining oversight and dealing with the safety of hazardous production facilities and projects. I cannot help but agree that, of course, the wage levels of the relevant categories of employees of Rostekhnadzor [Federal Service for Environmental, Technological and Nuclear Supervision], do not match the level of their responsibility while fulfilling their official duties. Therefore, I am asking you to stipulate and pass the relevant decisions envisaging financial and other support for state inspectors. Such support should not be lower than the average wages of mine administration officials. I am asking the Government to submit proposals on this score, and the Presidential Executive Office should draft an instruction together with the concerned agencies.

I wish you all the best. Thank you.



////



Meeting with permanent members of the Security Council
Event_Date: 26/11/2021
Event_Time: 21:20
Event_Place: Sochi

Unfortunately, I have to begin today’s meeting with a tragedy that happened in Kuzbass. Before we begin discussing the topics on today’s agenda, I would like us to observe a minute of silence in memory of all the victims in Kuzbass, both miners and rescuers.

(A minute of silence.)

Thank you.

I want to once again express condolences to the families of the victims and wish a speedy recovery to all those injured.

We are in constant contact with Governor Tsivilev; the Emergencies Minister has also reported to me. I ask the Government of the Russian Federation and the regional authorities to do everything to support the injured and the victims’ families. The Prosecutor General’s Office and the Investigative Committee have also been instructed to determine the causes of the tragedy.

Whenever such tragic events occur, we immediately start investigating what had caused them. We must make sure that nothing like this happens in the future, and to achieve that we need system-wide efforts and control over the execution of previous decisions. We will speak about that separately and in detail.

Meanwhile, let us return to the topic we have gathered to discuss. I will brief you on the outcome of my talks with President of Azerbaijan and Prime Minister of Armenia on the Nagorno-Karabakh settlement and on the agreements we reached during our meeting today.

As planned, we will have an in-depth discussion on the entire range of relations with our closest partners and neighbours. I am referring to relations with the CIS countries. Mr Kozak will make a report today, so I give him the floor. Go ahead, please.



////



Meeting on social issues
Event_Date: 18/11/2021
Event_Time: 18:35
Event_Place: The_Kremlin_Moscow

Colleagues, welcome again.

I would like to sum up some results of our discussions, meetings we had recently on social policy, including the meeting held yesterday. We discussed crucial issues, which, of course, our people are worried about. They are related to increase in incomes, improving wellbeing and the quality of people’s lives, which, in fact, concern everyone.

Let me stress the following: the social block is key to our state policy and is a key priority of the federal budget. State Duma deputies are also working hard on it. In this context, I would like to outline a number of issues that require joint action of the legislative and executive powers.

First, the draft federal budget for next year now envisages adjusting the subsistence level by 2.5 percent. Of course, this is not enough, because such parameters lag significantly behind the current inflation rate, which has accelerated in recent months.

I suggest setting a higher subsistence level for 2022 and increasing it at a faster pace than inflation, by 8.6 percent. In absolute terms, the average subsistence wage in the country must reach 12,654 rubles a month, which is 1,000 rubles more than today.

Let me add that the subsistence minimum is related to many social benefits, such as payments to families with children, additional social payments and pension supplements; therefore, it is not the absolute figure that is important, but what it is related to. And let me remind you that these benefits are paid to millions of our citizens. Of course, these payments will also grow.

Second. Under the Russian Constitution, the minimum wage cannot be less than the subsistence minimum, which means the minimum wage should increase along with indexation of the subsistence minimum. Next year, it should also grow by 1,100 rubles, or 8.6 percent. Thus, the minimum wage next year will be 13,890 rubles per month.

This decision impacts many of our citizens, and again, the thing is that the minimum wage is used to calculate benefits for temporary disability and also serves as a guideline when setting salaries in the public sector, in economic sectors.

I would ask the Presidential Executive Office to prepare amendments on the increased indexation of the subsistence minimum and the minimum wage in 2022. In the coming days I will submit them to the State Duma, so I would ask the deputies to support them during the second reading of the draft law on federal budget.

And, finally, the third very important thing – no less important than the two points mentioned above: at the United Russia party congress, I said that the rate of pension indexation should be higher than actual inflation. At the same time, let me remind you that since 2019 we have strictly adhered to this rule. Today, given the significant increase in inflation, it would be a mistake to deviate from this principle.

Proposals on specific parameters for indexing pensions are now being worked out both by the Government and the Presidential Executive Office, and the deputies are considering this issue as well. We will return to this in the near future taking into account how the macroeconomic indicators develop. We also talked about this yesterday, I would ask you to keep this in mind and submit proposals soon.

Thank you very much.


////



Meeting of the Supreme State Council of the Union State
Event_Date: 4/11/2021
Event_Time: 18:35
Event_Place: Sevastopol

Mr Lukashenko, friends,

The meeting of the Supreme State Council of the Union State we are holding today is, without exaggeration, truly important. We will be adopting a series of documents for further promoting and enhancing the economic, political and military integration of Russia and Belarus.

It is symbolic that this meeting is taking place on a special day for Russia – National Unity Day. Mr Lukashenko, thank you very much for your congratulations. This holiday symbolises the sincere and deep love of our Motherland, as well as the triumphant spirit of unity that has been passed on from one generation to another for many centuries.

In this regard, Russia and Belarus have much in common. We share the bond of centuries-old brotherly friendship, a shared past, spiritual and moral values, and quite often, family ties. In all times, our peoples have assisted one another in their hour of need. Together, we have defended freedom and independence, fought shoulder to shoulder against external enemies, and worked hand in hand to ensure the wellbeing and prosperity of our peoples.

I have said this on many occasions, but still I would like to reiterate that for Russia, Belarus is not just a good neighbour and our closest ally, with whom we have built a relationship of mutual respect and support, seeking to take into account each other’s interests, but also a truly brotherly Republic, a brotherly people. Making sure that it stays this way forever is our unwavering commitment.

Since the citizens of our countries want unity, 25 years ago Russia and Belarus embarked on a journey to establish a political and economic integration structure, the Union State. Over the past quarter of a century, we have accomplished a great deal together for our common economic space.

Our countries’ economies are closely intertwined and deeply interconnected. Russia is the main business partner for Belarus and accounts for almost one half of Belarus’ foreign trade. We rank first in terms of direct investment in the Belarusian economy, that’s about US$4 billion. Some 2,400 Russian companies operate in Belarus. In turn, Belarus is Russia’s number one trading partner within the CIS and ranks fourth among all our foreign trade partners with a share close to 5 percent.

Even during the coronavirus pandemic, as the President of Belarus has just mentioned, there has been some positive momentum in our bilateral economic cooperation. In particular, according to the data we have, in the first eight months of 2021 bilateral trade increased by almost 36 percent to US$24 billion, while Mr Lukashenko has data for the first nine months: the numbers could be approaching US$28 billion, which is a very robust result.

Multifaceted sectoral ties and industrial cooperation between Russia and Belarus are also picking up steam with new shared value chains and a growing common transport infrastructure. We are carrying out high-tech, research-intensive projects, including the construction of a nuclear power station in Belarus – the first unit was launched this year.

I would like to remind you about the proposal put forward by Belarus; the President of Belarus also mentioned this in his remarks. It deals with adding a Belarusian cosmonaut to the International Space Station crew. Yesterday, we discussed this with Roscosmos executives in Sochi. We are ready to support this proposal and to carry it out soon. We need to agree on some aspects, but these are not challenging matters, so I am sure we will resolve them.

As for integration, we will not rest on our laurels. The President of Belarus said we would be approving a comprehensive and far-reaching document today: the Guidelines for Implementing the Provisions of the Treaty Establishing the Union State for 2021–2023. This is the fruit of lengthy, intensive, and sometimes challenging talks between our governments and corresponding agencies. Mr Lukashenko and I kept a close eye on the progress of these talks.

This document covers 28 sectoral Union programmes designed to promote a coordinated macroeconomic strategy, introduce unified taxation principles, which is extremely important, implement a common policy in the credit and financial and banking sectors, in industry and agriculture, harmonise regulations for the unified oil, gas and electric power markets and for transport services.

By the way, I have just mentioned the oil and gas markets. We keep a close eye on these matters since they are very important and often cause controversy and heated debate. Nevertheless, even in this sphere we have achieved serious progress. You are probably aware of what has been going on in the global oil and gas markets. Today, Belarus receives natural gas from Russia at a price that is seven or eight times, and at certain points, nine or ten times lower than the European spot markets. Even if we are talking about gas supplies to our consumers under Gazprom’s long-term contracts and make a comparison with them, the price Belarus pays is still three or four times lower. This concerns the people of Belarus and the households there that get energy at the lowest possible price. This also benefits the entire Belarusian economy and its industry, placing it in a favourable competitive environment, which facilitates its development.

By carrying out these sectoral integration programmes, Russia and Belarus can create an equal and unified business environment. The two economies will follow common rules and standards, which creates new, truly broad opportunities to promote their progress and will benefit all sectors without exception.

Of course, full economic integration would be impossible without progress on establishing a single migration and visa space. It is essential that we fully deliver on the promise of unimpeded labour mobility and guarantee our citizens the freedom of movement while taking into consideration all associated security risks. This is the purpose of the Union State Migration Policy Concept as drafted by our governments. A lot has been done on this front as well.

Building the Union State is not just about intertwined economies, but also about coordinating our efforts in other spheres, including political and defence matters. The President of Belarus has mentioned this as well. In this regard, it is essential that we facilitate close ties between Russian and Belarusian ministries and agencies. Of course, the role of the Permanent Committee of the Union State will be growing.

Creating an atmosphere of stability and security along our external borders has special importance in this context. We will work together to counter any attempts to interfere in the domestic affairs of sovereign states. Make no mistake, Russia will continue supporting the brotherly people of Belarus.

The Union State will make meaningful progress in promoting integration. At the end of the day, this will improve the standard of living and wellbeing of our people. Of course, we will keep up our targeted efforts to give new significance to the Union State and fully unlock its creative potential.

Thank you for your attention.

<…>

Vladimir Putin: Yes, I am indeed in Sevastopol today to mark National Unity Day as well as to attend the unveiling of this monument. It is a great statue I think, and I recommend everyone to see it. And the story itself is quite exciting, I mean the people depicted – the Berens twin brothers as far as I know – looking so valiant and handsome. One of them joined the ‘red’ side and commanded the navy in the Russian Federation, and the other – the White Movement naval forces. Both were admirals, and they never saw each other again after one of them emigrated from Russia. Both died without ever seeing each other again. It is an interesting story, and I hope that this symbolism – the twins, two naval commanders standing side by side on this pedestal – truly reflects a return to the unity of the multiethnic Russian nation.

We will always be happy to see you here so you can see it.

If I may, Mr President, a few words about today's agenda.

Like yourself, I too would like to thank our governments for the work done. It was a complex and multi-vector effort. But there is something else I would like to say in this regard. Colleagues, we are well aware that today, with the recent economic losses and challenges in the social sphere caused by the coronavirus, one of the most effective tools for overcoming this crisis is to combine efforts with countries located close to each other. Countries that are neighbours are opting for cooperation, directing joint efforts towards the economy in general or towards specific industries, and looking for solutions through integration, among other possibilities. This is happening all over the world; I would like to emphasise this. You are well aware that this is happening across the globe – in Southeast Asia, in Africa, South America, Central and North America – everywhere, certainly including Europe.

Unfortunately, the post-Soviet countries are lagging behind in many areas of such integration. We are not making full use of the opportunities, the competitive advantages we have inherited from the Soviet Union. I am referring to the common infrastructure, the common energy grid, and the Russian language, which has a unifying power and helps us communicate with each other.

However, we have made good progress in developing the Union State, advancing further than on other tracks. Incidentally, such uneven integration is seen in almost all integration associations, to one degree or another. There is nothing unusual here.

And the fact that we have made progress, as the President of Belarus said today, is setting a good example to our partners, in the EAEU as well as in other post-Soviet platforms.

We certainly hope that the agreements reached by our governments in the previous period, the ones we have formalised today by signing the document we have gathered here to discuss, will be a major step forward, absolutely unrelated to any of our countries’ internal political agendas. It simply reflects the need for our economies to function effectively and create competitive advantages in order to improve the efficiency of our work, which ultimately aims to improve our citizens’ living standards.

Mr President, I would like to thank you for having kept this process under constant review, for your part. And to all our colleagues as well, thank you very much.



////



G20 Summit second session
Event_Date: 31/10/2021
Event_Time: 16:00
Event_Place: Novo-Ogaryovo_Moscow_Region


Mr President of the G20 Mario Draghi,

Colleagues,

Indeed, the matters related to combatting climate change that we are discussing today are of the utmost importance and concern each and every one of us. Russia, like other countries, is experiencing – actually experiencing – the negative bearing of global warming, and here is why: we are faced with desertification and soil erosion, and we are especially worried about the thawing of the permafrost, which accounts for a significant part of Russia’s territory.

I would like to note that the average annual temperature in Russia is growing faster than around the globe, more than 2.5 times. It has increased by almost half a degree in the past 10 years. In the Arctic, as we all know, the warming is even faster.

Naturally, our country is vigorously participating and taking the lead in international climate mitigation and stabilisation efforts. We faithfully comply with all our obligations under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Paris Agreement. We are consistently implementing a policy to reduce net greenhouse gas emissions and are taking steps to improve energy efficiency in our national economy, to modernise our power generation industry, and reduce associated gas discharge from oil production.

The low-carbon power industry is growing at a rapid pace in Russia. The share of energy generated from practically carbon-free sources such as nuclear power plants, hydroelectric dams, wind and solar power plants exceeds 40 percent today, or 86 if we include natural gas, which is the lowest-carbon fuel among hydrocarbons. This is one of the best indicators in the world.

According to international experts, Russia is among global decarbonisation leaders. In the past 20 years, Russia’s economy’s carbon intensity has been declining by an average of 2.7 percent annually, which is better than across the globe and even better than in the G7 countries.

Recently, we decided to implement a new programme to improve energy efficiency for the period until 2035. This programme will make an important contribution to our achieving carbon neutrality by 2060 at the latest. We have publicly announced this commitment.

Moreover, we do not just intend to achieve carbon neutrality; we are also going to make sure that in the next three decades, the accumulated volume of net greenhouse gas emissions in Russia will be even lower than that of our neighbours and colleagues in the European Union. This is a perfectly achievable objective for Russia.

We hope that together with our partners we will make long-term plans and prioritise them in our energy sectors, relying on the principles of technological neutrality, while objectively taking into account the carbon footprint of various types of power generation. In particular, I would like to mention the carbon footprint of solar energy, which, according to research findings, is four times higher than that of nuclear energy.

It is important that the international community’s efforts be directed toward supporting primarily the most effective environmental projects. It is our suggestion that experts begin ranking such projects according to their results as measured by how much greenhouse gas in the atmosphere is reduced for every dollar invested.

It cannot be ruled out that some of the projects included in the ranking, such as projects to preserve, for instance, forests in Russia and Latin America, will turn out to be more effective than investments in renewable energy in other countries.

I would also like to underscore that, in our opinion, it is not enough to simply reduce emissions to solve the global warming problem. It is equally important to increase the absorption of greenhouse gases, and here Russia, as well as in a number of other countries, has tremendous potential in terms of the absorbing potential of its forests, the tundra, agricultural lands, seas and swamps.

To achieve full use of this amazing potential, we plan to significantly improve the quality of forest management, increase reforestation areas, expand areas of untouched nature, and introduce new agricultural technologies.

Climate projects in Russia will also create new opportunities for international cooperation for many decades to come, and of course, they will make a significant contribution to global efforts on the climate track.

Overall, we believe that when implementing climate and environmental initiatives, it is important for the G20 to take the lead in drafting uniform, – and I emphasise – fair and, no less importantly, transparent rules for climate regulation. These rules should be based on mutually recognised verification and monitoring methods for greenhouse gas emissions and absorption.

And most importantly, climate change should be addressed in a comprehensive manner, closely linked with steps to promote economic growth and, as my colleagues have already noted, people’s living standards.

Thank you for your attention.



////



First session of the G20 Summit
Event_Date: 30/10/2021
Event_Time: 14:10
Event_Place: The_Kremlin_Moscow

Chairman Draghi, colleagues,

I shall speak on the topics that were put forward by Italy for today’s discussion: the global economy and global health.

I should say straight away that this theme largely concerns what we are all working on, and Russia’s position, as I saw from the previous speeches, mainly overlaps with what our colleagues spoke about here.

Last year the economic authorities of the G20 member countries and many other countries decided to significantly increase their budget deficits against the backdrop of the deep crisis caused by the pandemic, which allowed for launching global economic recovery. However, such extraordinary measure accompanied by securities buyouts by central banks should be limited in time. In fact, this is what was said here earlier.

In Russia, for example, the budget deficit rose to four percent of the GDP in 2020 against the background of large-scale support measures for the population, small and medium-sized businesses, and the healthcare system. This allowed us to achieve a recovery of the labour market. In the current year we have normalised our macroeconomic policy to the point that the budget will be in the surplus. We have not only achieved that, but we have also tightened out monetary policy.

Overall, the situation in G20 countries is slightly different. While in 2017–2019, the average budget deficit was around 3.8 percent of GDP, it grew to 11.2 percent in 2020 amidst the pandemic. This year, although slightly lower, the budget deficit remains rather high at 8.7 percent. I would like to note that the United States will account for 40 percent of the G20 countries’ budget deficits combined in 2020–2021. I am saying this because we all understand very well that the state of the US economy is what determines the state of the global economy.

Excessive stimulation has resulted in the general lack of stability, growing prices of financial assets and goods in certain markets such as energy, food, etc. Once again, significant budget deficits in the developed economies are the main cause of these developments. With these deficits persisting, there is a risk of high global inflation in the medium term, which not only increases the risk of lower business activity but reinforces and exacerbates the inequality that was also mentioned today.

That is why it is important to prevent aggravating stagflation and instead do what can be done to normalise the budgetary and monetary policies, improve the quality of demand management in the economy and update economic priorities – and primarily prioritise overcoming inequality and boosting public welfare.

We have always welcomed and continue to welcome the efforts of the G20 to support the poorest countries. I agree with those who have already said that sustainable growth of the global economy is, of course, impossible unless this issue is addressed. By the way, the developed countries, including many of the G20 states, have recently been affected by inequality and poverty. It is important to deal with this problem by means of economic and budgetary policy.

I would like to point out that, despite the decisions of the G20, vaccines and other vital resources are still not available to all the countries in need. Among other reasons, this is due to competition, which is dishonest, in my opinion, as well as protectionism and the fact that certain countries, including G20 countries, are not ready for mutual recognition of the vaccines and vaccination certificates.

There is an urgent need for the World Health Organisation to expedite the pre-qualification of new vaccines and drugs – that is, to evaluate their quality, safety and effectiveness. I am convinced that the sooner this is accomplished, the easier it will be to resume global business activity, including tourism, which has been hit the hardest.

I propose instructing healthcare ministries of the G20 to address the matter of mutual recognition of national vaccination certificates within the shortest possible term.

Experts believe that COVID-19 will continue to be a threat for a long time. I think WHO representatives will speak about this today as well. Considering that the virus continues mutating, we should develop mechanisms to boost vaccines promptly and consistently.

I would like to remind you that Russia was the first country in the world to register a COVID-19 vaccine, Sputnik V. Currently, this vaccine is approved in 70 countries with a total population of over 4 billion people, and it has demonstrated high safety and effectiveness. In addition to the double-dose Sputnik V, we also developed and widely use a single-dose vaccine, Sputnik Light, which can boost the effect of other vaccines. We are working with our colleagues from Europe on having this vaccine available there and offering it to our partners.

Large-scale efforts to counter the coronavirus require higher-quality and more affordable medical care in all countries and, therefore, wider international cooperation in healthcare. In view of the current situation, the role of the World Health Organisation is becoming increasingly important and its activities, of course, deserve our full support. It is unacceptable to make attempts to impinge upon the prerogatives of the WHO, which operates under the aegis of the United Nations. In this context, I fully agree with the President of France, Mr Macron.

In addition to the pandemic, other crises on the regional energy markets have shown once again how essential it is for the modern world to have a stable and reliable energy sector. I would like to say a few words about this. Supplying affordable energy to consumers is extremely important and our colleagues have just talked about it. I would like to add that the stability of global energy markets directly depends on the responsible conduct of all market participants, both energy producers and energy consumers, with due account for each party’s long-term interests.

Russia supports having an in-depth pragmatic discussion of this matter, based on purely economic considerations.

Colleagues,

Creating conditions for an equal and non-discriminatory cooperation for all nations is the main prerequisite for a steady and long-term recovery of the global economy, higher quality of life and better public welfare. As we understand, this is the key goal for the G20 as a forum of the world’s leading economies.

Thank you very much.



////



Valdai Discussion Club meeting
Event_Date: 21/10/2021
Event_Time: 21:25
Event_Place: Sochi

Ladies and gentlemen,

To begin with, I would like to thank you for coming to Russia and taking part in the Valdai Club events.

As always, during these meetings you raise pressing issues and hold comprehensive discussions of these issues that, without exaggeration, matter for people around the world. Once again, the key theme of the forum was put in a straightforward, I would even say, point-blank manner: Global Shake-up in the 21st Century: The Individual, Values and the State.

Indeed, we are living in an era of great change. If I may, by tradition, I will offer my views with regard to the agenda that you have come up with.

In general, this phrase, “to live in an era of great change,” may seem trite since we use it so often. Also, this era of change began quite a long time ago, and changes have become part of everyday life. Hence, the question: are they worth focusing on? I agree with those who made the agenda for these meetings; of course they are.

In recent decades, many people have cited a Chinese proverb. The Chinese people are wise, and they have many thinkers and valuable thoughts that we can still use today. One of them, as you may know, says, “God forbid living in a time of change.” But we are already living in it, whether we like it or not, and these changes are becoming deeper and more fundamental. But let us consider another Chinese wisdom: the word “crisis” consists of two hieroglyphs – there are probably representatives of the People's Republic of China in the audience, and they will correct me if I have it wrong – but, two hieroglyphs, “danger” and “opportunity.” And as we say here in Russia, “fight difficulties with your mind, and fight dangers with your experience.”

Of course, we must be aware of the danger and be ready to counter it, and not just one threat but many diverse threats that can arise in this era of change. However, it is no less important to recall a second component of the crisis – opportunities that must not be missed, all the more so since the crisis we are facing is conceptual and even civilisation-related. This is basically a crisis of approaches and principles that determine the very existence of humans on Earth, but we will have to seriously revise them in any event. The question is where to move, what to give up, what to revise or adjust. In saying this, I am convinced that it is necessary to fight for real values, upholding them in every way.

Humanity entered into a new era about three decades ago when the main conditions were created for ending military-political and ideological confrontation. I am sure you have talked a lot about this in this discussion club. Our Foreign Minister also talked about it, but nevertheless I would like to repeat several things.

A search for a new balance, sustainable relations in the social, political, economic, cultural and military areas and support for the world system was launched at that time. We were looking for this support but must say that we did not find it, at least so far. Meanwhile, those who felt like the winners after the end of the Cold War (we have also spoken about this many times) and thought they climbed Mount Olympus soon discovered that the ground was falling away underneath even there, and this time it was their turn, and nobody could “stop this fleeting moment” no matter how fair it seemed.

In general, it must have seemed that we adjusted to this continuous inconstancy, unpredictability and permanent state of transition, but this did not happen either.

I would like to add that the transformation that we are seeing and are part of is of a different calibre than the changes that repeatedly occurred in human history, at least those we know about. This is not simply a shift in the balance of forces or scientific and technological breakthroughs, though both are also taking place. Today, we are facing systemic changes in all directions – from the increasingly complicated geophysical condition of our planet to a more paradoxical interpretation of what a human is and what the reasons for his existence are.

Let us look around. And I will say this again: I will allow myself to express a few thoughts that I sign on to.

Firstly, climate change and environmental degradation are so obvious that even the most careless people can no longer dismiss them. One can continue to engage in scientific debates about the mechanisms behind the ongoing processes, but it is impossible to deny that these processes are getting worse, and something needs to be done. Natural disasters such as droughts, floods, hurricanes, and tsunamis have almost become the new normal, and we are getting used to them. Suffice it to recall the devastating, tragic floods in Europe last summer, the fires in Siberia – there are a lot of examples. Not only in Siberia – our neighbours in Turkey have also had wildfires, and the United States, and other places on the American continent. It sometimes seems that any geopolitical, scientific and technical, or ideological rivalry becomes pointless in this context, if the winners will have not enough air to breathe or nothing to drink.

The coronavirus pandemic has become another reminder of how fragile our community is, how vulnerable it is, and our most important task is to ensure humanity a safe existence and resilience. To increase our chance of survival in the face of cataclysms, we absolutely need to rethink how we go about our lives, how we run our households, how cities develop or how they should develop; we need to reconsider economic development priorities of entire states. I repeat, safety is one of our main imperatives, in any case it has become obvious now, and anyone who tries to deny this will have to later explain why they were wrong and why they were unprepared for the crises and shocks whole nations are facing.

Second. The socioeconomic problems facing humankind have worsened to the point where, in the past, they would trigger worldwide shocks, such as world wars or bloody social cataclysms. Everyone is saying that the current model of capitalism which underlies the social structure in the overwhelming majority of countries, has run its course and no longer offers a solution to a host of increasingly tangled differences.

Everywhere, even in the richest countries and regions, the uneven distribution of material wealth has exacerbated inequality, primarily, inequality of opportunities both within individual societies and at the international level. I mentioned this formidable challenge in my remarks at the Davos Forum earlier this year. No doubt, these problems threaten us with major and deep social divisions.

Furthermore, a number of countries and even entire regions are regularly hit by food crises. We will probably discuss this later, but there is every reason to believe that this crisis will become worse in the near future and may reach extreme forms. There are also shortages of water and electricity (we will probably cover this today as well), not to mention poverty, high unemployment rates or lack of adequate healthcare.

Lagging countries are fully aware of that and are losing faith in the prospects of ever catching up with the leaders. Disappointment spurs aggression and pushes people to join the ranks of extremists. People in these countries have a growing sense of unfulfilled and failed expectations and the lack of any opportunities not only for themselves, but for their children, as well. This is what makes them look for better lives and results in uncontrolled migration, which, in turn, creates fertile ground for social discontent in more prosperous countries. I do not need to explain anything to you, since you can see everything with your own eyes and are, probably, versed on these matters even better than I.

As I noted earlier, prosperous leading powers have other pressing social problems, challenges and risks in ample supply, and many among them are no longer interested in fighting for influence since, as they say, they already have enough on their plates. The fact that society and young people in many countries have overreacted in a harsh and even aggressive manner to measures to combat the coronavirus showed – and I want to emphasise this, I hope someone has already mentioned this before me at other venues – so, I think that this reaction showed that the pandemic was just a pretext: the causes for social irritation and frustration run much deeper.

I have another important point to make. The pandemic, which, in theory, was supposed to rally the people in the fight against this massive common threat, has instead become a divisive rather than a unifying factor. There are many reasons for that, but one of the main ones is that they started looking for solutions to problems among the usual approaches – a variety of them, but still the old ones, but they just do not work. Or, to be more precise, they do work, but often and oddly enough, they worsen the existing state of affairs.

By the way, Russia has repeatedly called for, and I will repeat this, stopping these inappropriate ambitions and for working together. We will probably talk about this later but it is clear what I have in mind. We are talking about the need to counter the coronavirus infection together. But nothing changes; everything remains the same despite the humanitarian considerations. I am not referring to Russia now, let’s leave the sanctions against Russia for now; I mean the sanctions that remain in place against those states that badly need international assistance. Where are the humanitarian fundamentals of Western political thought? It appears there is nothing there, just idle talk. Do you understand? This is what seems to be on the surface.

Furthermore, the technological revolution, impressive achievements in artificial intelligence, electronics, communications, genetics, bioengineering, and medicine open up enormous opportunities, but at the same time, in practical terms, they raise philosophical, moral and spiritual questions that were until recently the exclusive domain of science fiction writers. What will happen if machines surpass humans in the ability to think? Where is the limit of interference in the human body beyond which a person ceases being himself and turns into some other entity? What are the general ethical limits in the world where the potential of science and machines are becoming almost boundless? What will this mean for each of us, for our descendants, our nearest descendants – our children and grandchildren?

These changes are gaining momentum, and they certainly cannot be stopped because they are objective as a rule. All of us will have to deal with the consequences regardless of our political systems, economic condition or prevailing ideology.

Verbally, all states talk about their commitment to the ideals of cooperation and a willingness to work together for resolving common problems but, unfortunately, these are just words. In reality, the opposite is happening, and the pandemic has served to fuel the negative trends that emerged long ago and are now only getting worse. The approach based on the proverb, “your own shirt is closer to the body,” has finally become common and is now no longer even concealed. Moreover, this is often even a matter of boasting and brandishing. Egotistic interests prevail over the notion of the common good.

Of course, the problem is not just the ill will of certain states and notorious elites. It is more complicated than that, in my opinion. In general, life is seldom divided into black and white. Every government, every leader is primarily responsible to his own compatriots, obviously. The main goal is to ensure their security, peace and prosperity. So, international, transnational issues will never be as important for a national leadership as domestic stability. In general, this is normal and correct.

We need to face the fact the global governance institutions are not always effective and their capabilities are not always up to the challenge posed by the dynamics of global processes. In this sense, the pandemic could help – it clearly showed which institutions have what it takes and which need fine-tuning.

The re-alignment of the balance of power presupposes a redistribution of shares in favour of rising and developing countries that until now felt left out. To put it bluntly, the Western domination of international affairs, which began several centuries ago and, for a short period, was almost absolute in the late 20th century, is giving way to a much more diverse system.

This transformation is not a mechanical process and, in its own way, one might even say, is unparalleled. Arguably, political history has no examples of a stable world order being established without a big war and its outcomes as the basis, as was the case after World War II. So, we have a chance to create an extremely favourable precedent. The attempt to create it after the end of the Cold War on the basis of Western domination failed, as we see. The current state of international affairs is a product of that very failure, and we must learn from this.

Some may wonder, what have we arrived at? We have arrived somewhere paradoxical. Just an example: for two decades, the most powerful nation in the world has been conducting military campaigns in two countries that it cannot be compared to by any standard. But in the end, it had to wind down operations without achieving a single goal that it had set for itself going in 20 years ago, and to withdraw from these countries causing considerable damage to others and itself. In fact, the situation has worsened dramatically.

But that is not the point. Previously, a war lost by one side meant victory for the other side, which took responsibility for what was happening. For example, the defeat of the United States in the Vietnam War, for example, did not make Vietnam a “black hole.” On the contrary, a successfully developing state arose there, which, admittedly, relied on the support of a strong ally. Things are different now: no matter who takes the upper hand, the war does not stop, but just changes form. As a rule, the hypothetical winner is reluctant or unable to ensure peaceful post-war recovery, and only worsens the chaos and the vacuum posing a danger to the world.

Colleagues,

What do you think are the starting points of this complex realignment process? Let me try to summarise the talking points.

First, the coronavirus pandemic has clearly shown that the international order is structured around nation states. By the way, recent developments have shown that global digital platforms – with all their might, which we could see from the internal political processes in the United States – have failed to usurp political or state functions. These attempts proved ephemeral. The US authorities, as I said, have immediately put the owners of these platforms in their place, which is exactly what is being done in Europe, if you just look at the size of the fines imposed on them and the demonopolisation measures being taken. You are aware of that.

In recent decades, many have tossed around fancy concepts claiming that the role of the state was outdated and outgoing. Globalisation supposedly made national borders an anachronism, and sovereignty an obstacle to prosperity. You know, I said it before and I will say it again. This is also what was said by those who attempted to open up other countries’ borders for the benefit of their own competitive advantages. This is what actually happened. And as soon as it transpired that someone somewhere is achieving great results, they immediately returned to closing borders in general and, first of all, their own customs borders and what have you, and started building walls. Well, were we supposed to not notice, or what? Everyone sees everything and everyone understands everything perfectly well. Of course, they do.

There is no point in disputing it anymore. It is obvious. But events, when we spoke about the need to open up borders, events, as I said, went in the opposite direction. Only sovereign states can effectively respond to the challenges of the times and the demands of the citizens. Accordingly, any effective international order should take into account the interests and capabilities of the state and proceed on that basis, and not try to prove that they should not exist. Furthermore, it is impossible to impose anything on anyone, be it the principles underlying the sociopolitical structure or values that someone, for their own reasons, has called universal. After all, it is clear that when a real crisis strikes, there is only one universal value left and that is human life, which each state decides for itself how best to protect based on its abilities, culture and traditions.

In this regard, I will again note how severe and dangerous the coronavirus pandemic has become. As we know, more than 4.9 million have died of it. These terrifying figures are comparable and even exceed the military losses of the main participants in World War I.

The second point I would like to draw your attention to is the scale of change that forces us to act extremely cautiously, if only for reasons of self-preservation. The state and society must not respond radically to qualitative shifts in technology, dramatic environmental changes or the destruction of traditional systems. It is easier to destroy than to create, as we all know. We in Russia know this very well, regrettably, from our own experience, which we have had several times.

Just over a century ago, Russia objectively faced serious problems, including because of the ongoing World War I, but its problems were not bigger and possibly even smaller or not as acute as the problems the other countries faced, and Russia could have dealt with its problems gradually and in a civilised manner. But revolutionary shocks led to the collapse and disintegration of a great power. The second time this happened 30 years ago, when a potentially very powerful nation failed to enter the path of urgently needed, flexible but thoroughly substantiated reforms at the right time, and as a result it fell victim to all kinds of dogmatists, both reactionary ones and the so-called progressives – all of them did their bit, all sides did.

These examples from our history allow us to say that revolutions are not a way to settle a crisis but a way to aggravate it. No revolution was worth the damage it did to the human potential.

Third. The importance of a solid support in the sphere of morals, ethics and values is increasing dramatically in the modern fragile world. In point of fact, values are a product, a unique product of cultural and historical development of any nation. The mutual interlacing of nations definitely enriches them, openness expands their horizons and allows them to take a fresh look at their own traditions. But the process must be organic, and it can never be rapid. Any alien elements will be rejected anyway, possibly bluntly. Any attempts to force one’s values on others with an uncertain and unpredictable outcome can only further complicate a dramatic situation and usually produce the opposite reaction and an opposite from the intended result.

We look in amazement at the processes underway in the countries which have been traditionally looked at as the standard-bearers of progress. Of course, the social and cultural shocks that are taking place in the United States and Western Europe are none of our business; we are keeping out of this. Some people in the West believe that an aggressive elimination of entire pages from their own history, “reverse discrimination” against the majority in the interests of a minority, and the demand to give up the traditional notions of mother, father, family and even gender, they believe that all of these are the mileposts on the path towards social renewal.

Listen, I would like to point out once again that they have a right to do this, we are keeping out of this. But we would like to ask them to keep out of our business as well. We have a different viewpoint, at least the overwhelming majority of Russian society – it would be more correct to put it this way – has a different opinion on this matter. We believe that we must rely on our own spiritual values, our historical tradition and the culture of our multiethnic nation.

The advocates of so-called ‘social progress’ believe they are introducing humanity to some kind of a new and better consciousness. Godspeed, hoist the flags as we say, go right ahead. The only thing that I want to say now is that their prescriptions are not new at all. It may come as a surprise to some people, but Russia has been there already. After the 1917 revolution, the Bolsheviks, relying on the dogmas of Marx and Engels, also said that they would change existing ways and customs and not just political and economic ones, but the very notion of human morality and the foundations of a healthy society. The destruction of age-old values, religion and relations between people, up to and including the total rejection of family (we had that, too), encouragement to inform on loved ones – all this was proclaimed progress and, by the way, was widely supported around the world back then and was quite fashionable, same as today. By the way, the Bolsheviks were absolutely intolerant of opinions other than theirs.

This, I believe, should call to mind some of what we are witnessing now. Looking at what is happening in a number of Western countries, we are amazed to see the domestic practices, which we, fortunately, have left, I hope, in the distant past. The fight for equality and against discrimination has turned into aggressive dogmatism bordering on absurdity, when the works of the great authors of the past – such as Shakespeare – are no longer taught at schools or universities, because their ideas are believed to be backward. The classics are declared backward and ignorant of the importance of gender or race. In Hollywood memos are distributed about proper storytelling and how many characters of what colour or gender should be in a movie. This is even worse than the agitprop department of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.

Countering acts of racism is a necessary and noble cause, but the new ‘cancel culture’ has turned it into ‘reverse discrimination’ that is, reverse racism. The obsessive emphasis on race is further dividing people, when the real fighters for civil rights dreamed precisely about erasing differences and refusing to divide people by skin colour. I specifically asked my colleagues to find the following quote from Martin Luther King: “I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the colour of their skin but by their character.” This is the true value. However, things are turning out differently there. By the way, the absolute majority of Russian people do not think that the colour of a person's skin or their gender is an important matter. Each of us is a human being. This is what matters.

In a number of Western countries, the debate over men’s and women’s rights has turned into a perfect phantasmagoria. Look, beware of going where the Bolsheviks once planned to go – not only communalising chickens, but also communalising women. One more step and you will be there.

Zealots of these new approaches even go so far as to want to abolish these concepts altogether. Anyone who dares mention that men and women actually exist, which is a biological fact, risk being ostracised. “Parent number one” and “parent number two,” “'birthing parent” instead of “mother,” and “human milk” replacing “breastmilk” because it might upset the people who are unsure about their own gender. I repeat, this is nothing new; in the 1920s, the so-called Soviet Kulturtraegers also invented some newspeak believing they were creating a new consciousness and changing values that way. And, as I have already said, they made such a mess it still makes one shudder at times.

Not to mention some truly monstrous things when children are taught from an early age that a boy can easily become a girl and vice versa. That is, the teachers actually impose on them a choice we all supposedly have. They do so while shutting the parents out of the process and forcing the child to make decisions that can upend their entire life. They do not even bother to consult with child psychologists – is a child at this age even capable of making a decision of this kind? Calling a spade a spade, this verges on a crime against humanity, and it is being done in the name and under the banner of progress.

Well, if someone likes this, let them do it. I have already mentioned that, in shaping our approaches, we will be guided by a healthy conservatism. That was a few years ago, when passions on the international arena were not yet running as high as they are now, although, of course, we can say that clouds were gathering even then. Now, when the world is going through a structural disruption, the importance of reasonable conservatism as the foundation for a political course has skyrocketed – precisely because of the multiplying risks and dangers, and the fragility of the reality around us.

This conservative approach is not about an ignorant traditionalism, a fear of change or a restraining game, much less about withdrawing into our own shell. It is primarily about reliance on a time-tested tradition, the preservation and growth of the population, a realistic assessment of oneself and others, a precise alignment of priorities, a correlation of necessity and possibility, a prudent formulation of goals, and a fundamental rejection of extremism as a method. And frankly, in the impending period of global reconstruction, which may take quite long, with its final design being uncertain, moderate conservatism is the most reasonable line of conduct, as far as I see it. It will inevitably change at some point, but so far, do no harm – the guiding principle in medicine – seems to be the most rational one. Noli nocere, as they say.

Again, for us in Russia, these are not some speculative postulates, but lessons from our difficult and sometimes tragic history. The cost of ill-conceived social experiments is sometimes beyond estimation. Such actions can destroy not only the material, but also the spiritual foundations of human existence, leaving behind moral wreckage where nothing can be built to replace it for a long time.

Finally, there is one more point I want to make. We understand all too well that resolving many urgent problems the world has been facing would be impossible without close international cooperation. However, we need to be realistic: most of the pretty slogans about coming up with global solutions to global problems that we have been hearing since the late 20th century will never become reality. In order to achieve a global solution, states and people have to transfer their sovereign rights to supra-national structures to an extent that few, if any, would accept. This is primarily attributable to the fact that you have to answer for the outcomes of such policies not to some global public, but to your citizens and voters.

However, this does not mean that exercising some restraint for the sake of bringing about solutions to global challenges is impossible. After all, a global challenge is a challenge for all of us together, and to each of us in particular. If everyone saw a way to benefit from cooperation in overcoming these challenges, this would definitely leave us better equipped to work together.

One of the ways to promote these efforts could be, for example, to draw up, at the UN level, a list of challenges and threats that specific countries face, with details of how they could affect other countries. This effort could involve experts from various countries and academic fields, including you, my colleagues. We believe that developing a roadmap of this kind could inspire many countries to see global issues in a new light and understand how cooperation could be beneficial for them.

I have already mentioned the challenges international institutions are facing. Unfortunately, this is an obvious fact: it is now a question of reforming or closing some of them. However, the United Nations as the central international institution retains its enduring value, at least for now. I believe that in our turbulent world it is the UN that brings a touch of reasonable conservatism into international relations, something that is so important for normalising the situation.

Many criticise the UN for failing to adapt to a rapidly changing world. In part, this is true, but it is not the UN, but primarily its members who are to blame for this. In addition, this international body promotes not only international norms, but also the rule-making spirit, which is based on the principles of equality and maximum consideration for everyone’s opinions. Our mission is to preserve this heritage while reforming the organisation. However, in doing so we need to make sure that we do not throw the baby out with the bathwater, as the saying goes.

This is not the first time I am using a high rostrum to make this call for collective action in order to face up to the problems that continue to pile up and become more acute. It is thanks to you, friends and colleagues, that the Valdai Club is emerging or has already established itself as a high-profile forum. It is for this reason that I am turning to this platform to reaffirm our readiness to work together on addressing the most urgent problems that the world is facing today.

Friends,

The changes mentioned here prior to me, as well as by yours truly, are relevant to all countries and peoples. Russia, of course, is not an exception. Just like everyone else, we are searching for answers to the most urgent challenges of our time.

Of course, no one has any ready-made recipes. However, I would venture to say that our country has an advantage. Let me explain what this advantage is. It is to do with our historical experience. You may have noticed that I have referred to it several times in the course of my remarks. Unfortunately, we had to bring back many sad memories, but at least our society has developed what they now refer to as herd immunity to extremism that paves the way to upheavals and socioeconomic cataclysms. People really value stability and being able to live normal lives and to prosper while confident that the irresponsible aspirations of yet another group of revolutionaries will not upend their plans and aspirations. Many have vivid memories of what happened 30 years ago and all the pain it took to climb out of the ditch where our country and our society found themselves after the USSR fell apart.

The conservative views we hold are an optimistic conservatism, which is what matters the most. We believe stable, positive development to be possible. It all depends primarily on our own efforts. Of course, we are ready to work with our partners on common noble causes.

I would like to thank all participants once more, for your attention. As the tradition goes, I will gladly answer or at least try to answer your questions.

Thank you for your patience.

Moderator of the 18th annual meeting of the Valdai International Discussion Club closing session Fyodor Lukyanov: Thank you very much, Mr President, for your detailed remarks covering not only and not so much the current political problems, but fundamental issues. Following up on what you said, I cannot fail to ask you about the historical experience, traditions, conservatism and healthy conservatism that you have mentioned on several occasions in your remarks.

Does unhealthy conservatism frighten you? Where does the boundary separating the healthy from the unhealthy lie? At what point does a tradition turn from something that binds society together into a burden?

Vladimir Putin: Anything can become a burden, if you are not careful. When I speak about healthy conservatism, Nikolai Berdyayev always springs to mind, and I have already mentioned him several times. He was a remarkable Russian philosopher, and as you all know he was expelled from the Soviet Union in 1922. He was as forward-thinking as a man can be, but also sided with conservatism. He used to say, and you will excuse me if I do not quote his exact words: “Conservatism is not something preventing upward, forward movement, but something preventing you from sliding back into chaos.” If we treat conservatism this way, it provides an effective foundation for further progress.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Speaking of traditions, you also tend to mention traditional values quite frequently, and this is a hot topic in our society. In particular, you have proposed relying on traditional values as a foundation for bringing the world together. However, traditions are destined to be unique for every nation. How can everyone come together around the same traditional values, if they have their own traditions?

Vladimir Putin: Do you know what the trick is? The trick is that of course there is a lot of diversity and every nation around the world is different. Still, something unites all people. After all, we are all people, and we all want to live. Life is of absolute value.

In my opinion, the same applies to family as a value, because what can be more important than procreation? Do we want to be or not to be? If we do not want to be, fine. You see, adoption is also a good and important thing, but to adopt a child someone has to give birth to that child. This is the second universal value that cannot be contested.

I do not think that I need to list them all. You are all smart people here, and everyone understands this, including you. Yes, we do need to work together based on these shared, universal values.

Fyodor Lukyanov: You made a powerful statement when you said that the current model of capitalism has run its course and no longer offers a solution to international issues. One hears this a lot these days, but you are referring to our country’s unfortunate experience in the 20th century when we were actually rejecting capitalism, but this did not work out for us either. Does this mean that this is where we want to return? Where are we headed with this dysfunctional capitalist model?

Vladimir Putin: I also said that there were no ready-made recipes. It is true that what we are currently witnessing, for example on the energy markets, as we will probably discuss later, demonstrates that this kind of capitalism does not work. All they do is talk about the “invisible hand” of the market, only to get $1,500 or $2,000 per 1,000 cubic metres. Is this market-based approach to regulation any good?

When everything goes well and there is stability, economic actors around the world demand more freedom for themselves and a smaller role for the state in the economy. However, when challenges arise, especially at a global scale, they want the government to interfere.

I remember 2008 and 2009 and the global financial crisis very well. I was Prime Minister at the time, and spoke to many Russian business leaders, who were viewed as successful up to that point, and everything is fine with them now, by the way. They came to me and were ready to give up their companies that were worth tens of millions, if not hundreds of millions of dollars, for a ruble. Why? They had to assume responsibility for their workforce and for the future of these companies. It was easier for them just to keep what they earned and shift their responsibility to others.

At the time, we agreed that the state would lend them its shoulder: they kept their businesses, while the state paid off their margin loans and assumed responsibility, to a certain extent. Together with the businesses, we found a solution. As a result, we saved Russia’s largest private companies, and enabled the state to make a profit afterwards. We actually made money because when the companies were back on their feet, they paid back what they owed the state. The state made quite a profit.

In this regard, we do need to work together and explore each other’s experience. Other countries also had positive experiences in making the state and the market work in tune with each other. The People’s Republic of China is a case in point. While the Communist Party retains its leading role there, the country has a viable market and its institutions are quite effective. This is an obvious fact.

For this reason, there are no ready-made recipes. Wild capitalism does not work either, as I have already said, and I am ready to repeat this, as I have just demonstrated using these examples.

In a way, this is like art. You need to understand when to place a bigger emphasis on something: when to add more salt, and when to use more sugar. You see? While being guided by the general principles as articulated by international financial institutions such as the IMF, the OECD, etc., we need to understand where we are. To act, we need to understand how our capabilities compare with the plans we have. By the way, here in Russia we have been quite effective over the past years, including in overcoming the consequences of the epidemic. Other countries also performed quite well, as we can see.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Do you mean that we are moving not only towards an optimistic conservatism but also towards an optimistic capitalism?

Vladimir Putin: You see, we need to build a social welfare state. Truth be said, Europe, especially the Nordic countries, have been advocating a social welfare state for a long time. This is essential for us, considering the income gap between various social groups, even if this problem exists in all the leading economies of the world. Just look at the United States and Europe, although the income gap is smaller in Europe compared to the United States.

As I have said on multiple occasions, only a small group of people who were already rich to begin with benefited from the preferences that became available over the past years. Their wealth increased exponentially compared to the middle class and the poor. This problem clearly exists there, even if it is not as pressing in Europe, but it still exists.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Thank you.

I will ask the last question so that we do not keep the audience waiting. You mentioned the UN’s invaluable role. We can understand this, since the UN is a fundamental institution, and so on. However, many now criticise the UN, and you have mentioned this in your remarks.

Just a few days ago, President of Turkey Erdogan, whom you know well, said that the Security Council must be reformed because a group of WWII victor countries monopolised power, which is not the way it should be. Do you agree with this statement?

Vladimir Putin: I do not. He has recently visited Russia, as you know, and I had a meeting with him. I raised this question myself, saying that I saw his main points. I have to admit that I did not read the entire book, but I did look at some of the ideas. I agree with some of them. This is a good analysis. We can understand why a Turkish leader raises this issue. He probably believes that Turkey could become a permanent Security Council member. It is not up to Russia to decide, though. Matters of this kind must be decided by consensus. There are also India and South Africa. You see, this is a question of fairness, of striking a balance.

Different solutions are possible here. I would rather not talk about this now, getting ahead of things and preempting Russia's position on this discussion. But what is important (I just said so in my opening remarks, and I also said this to President Erdogan), if we dismantle the permanent members’ veto, the United Nations will die on the same day, will degrade into the League of Nations, and that will be it. It will be just a platform for discussion, Valdai Club number two. But there is only one Valdai Club, and it is here. (Laughter.)

Fyodor Lukyanov: We are ready to step in.

Vladimir Putin: Valdai Club number two will be in New York.

Fyodor Lukyanov: We will go and replace it with pleasure.

Vladimir Putin: But this is the point – we would rather not change anything. That is, some change might be necessary, but we would rather not destroy the basis – this is the whole point of the UN today, that there are five permanent members, and they have the power of veto. Other states are represented on the Security Council, but they are non-permanent members.

We need to think how we could make this organisation more balanced, because indeed – this is true, and in this sense, President Erdogan is right – it emerged after World War II, when there was a certain balance of power. Now it is changing; it has already changed.

We are well aware that China has overtaken the United States in purchasing power parity. What do you think that is? These are global changes.

And India? Another nation of almost 1.5 billion people, a rapidly developing economy, and so on. And why is Africa not represented? Where is Latin America? We definitely need to consider this – a growing giant there such as Brazil. These are all topics for discussion. Only, we must not rush. We must not make any mistakes on the path of reform.

Fyodor Lukyanov: The leaders of the Valdai Club will consider holding a meeting in New York. Only, they might not issue visas to all of us, I am afraid, but no problem, we will work on that.

Vladimir Putin: By the way, why not? The Valdai Club might as well meet in New York.

Fyodor Lukyanov: After you and Biden agree on the visas. (Laughter.)

Vladimir Putin: I do not think the heads of state will need to step in. Just ask Sergei Lavrov, he will speak with his colleagues there.

Why not? I am serious. Why not hold a Valdai Club session on a neutral site, outside the Russian Federation? Why not? I think it might be interesting.

We have important people here in this room, good analysts who are well known in their countries. More people can be invited in the host country to join these discussions. What is wrong with that? This is good.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Well, we have just set a goal.

Vladimir Putin: It is not a goal; it is a possibility.

Fyodor Lukyanov: A possibility. Like a crisis. It is also a possibility.

Vladimir Putin: Yes.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Please, Piotr Dutkiewicz.

Piotr Dutkiewicz: Mr President, I would like to return to the words you have just said, that Russia should rely on Russian values. By the way, we were talking about this at a Valdai Club meeting the day before yesterday.

I would like to ask you which Russian thinkers, scholars, anthropologists and writers do you regard as your closest soul-mates, helping you to define for yourself the values that will later become those of all Russians?

Vladimir Putin: You know, I would prefer not to say that this is Ivan Ilyin alone. I read Ilyin, I read him to this day. I have his book lying on my shelf, and I pick it up and read it from time to time. I have mentioned Berdiayev, there are other Russian thinkers. All of them are people who were thinking about Russia and its future. I am fascinated by the train of their thought, but, of course, I make allowances for the time when they were working, writing and formulating their ideas. The well-known idea about the passionarity of nations is a very interesting idea. It could be challenged – arguments around it continue to this day. But if there are debates over the ideas they formulated, these are obviously not idle ideas to say the least.

Let me remind you about nations’ passionarity. According to the author of this idea, peoples, nations, ethnic groups are like a living organism: they are born, reach the peak of their development, and then quietly grow old. Many countries, including those on the American continent, say today’s Western Europe is ageing. This is the term they use. It is hard to say whether this is right or not. But, to my mind, the idea that a nation should have an inner driving mechanism for development, a will for development and self-assertion has a leg to stand on.

We are observing that certain countries are on the rise even though they have a lot of unsolved problems. They resemble erupting volcanoes, like the one on the Spanish island, which is disgorging its lava. But there are also extinguished volcanoes, where fires are long dead and one can only hear birds singing.

You, please.

Piotr Dutkiewicz: Mr President, you have referred to Lev Gumilyov, who presented me with a samizdat edition of his first book in St Petersburg in 1979. I will pass this samizdat on to you.

Vladimir Putin: Thank you very much.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Samizdat, a tradition.

Dear friends, please introduce yourselves, when you take the floor.

Alexei Miller: Good afternoon, Mr President.

I am Alexei Miller, a historian from the European University at St Petersburg.

Vladimir Putin: There are two Alexei Millers. Russia is a rich country. (Laughter)

Alexei Miller: Two years ago, you were asked during a meeting at the Valdai Club about the European Parliament’s resolution, which made the Soviet Union (and hence Russia) and Nazi Germany equally responsible for the outbreak of WWII. Since then, you have commented on this issue several times in your statements and in the article published in the summer of 2020.

In particular, during the ceremony to unveil a monument to the victims of the siege of Leningrad at the Yad Vashem memorial complex in January 2020, you said you would like to propose a meeting of the Big Five leaders to discuss this issue as well, so that we could overcome the current confrontation and end the war on memory. I believe the situation has not improved since then. Or maybe you know something the general public is not aware of, maybe there have been some improvements? It would be great if you could tell us about this.

My second question follows on from the first one. When there is such confrontation in the countries that are involved in the war on memory, some forces may be tempted to join ranks and to restrict, to a greater or lesser degree, the freedom of discussion, including among historians. Such discussions always involve a difference of opinions and some risqué or even wrong views. Do you envision the threat of such restrictions in our country?

Vladimir Putin: No, I do not believe there is such a threat in our country. We sometimes see the danger of not being responsible for what some people say, indeed, but then this is the reverse side of the freedom you have mentioned.

As for my initiative to hold a meeting of the heads of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council, it has been supported by everyone, in principle, and such a meeting could have been organised. The problems that arose are not connected with Russia but with some disputes within this group of five countries. As I have said, they are not connected with Russia. This is the first point.

And the second is that the pandemic began soon after that, and the situation has become really complicated.

The idea of the meeting received a highly positive response, and I hope it will be held eventually. This definitely will be beneficial. We are discussing this with our American partners, with our Chinese friends, with France – incidentally, the French President supported it immediately, as well as with Britain. They have their own ideas and proposals on additional subjects that can be discussed at such a meeting. I hope the necessary conditions will develop and we will hold this meeting.

As for historical memory, the memory of WWII, you know, of course, that I am ready to talk about this with arguments in hand. We have many complaints about the country’s leadership between 1917 and 1990, which is obvious. However, placing the Nazis and the Communists before WWII on the same level and dividing responsibility between them equally is absolutely unacceptable. It is a lie.

I am saying this not only because I am Russian and, currently, the head of the Russian state, which is the legal successor of the Soviet Union. I am saying this now, in part or at least in part, as a researcher. I have read the documents, which I retrieved from the archives. We are publishing them now in increasingly large amounts.

Trust me, when I read them, the picture in my mind started changing. You can think about Stalin differently, blaming him for the prison camps, persecution campaigns and the like. But I have seen his instructions on documents. The Soviet government was genuinely doing its best to prevent WWII, even if for different reasons. Some people would say that the country was not ready for the war, which is why they tried to prevent it. But they did try to prevent it. They fought for the preservation of Czechoslovakia, providing arguments to protect its sovereignty. I have read, I have really read – this is not a secret, and we are declassifying these archives now – about France’s reaction to those events, including regarding the meeting of the leading politicians with Hitler in Munich in 1938.

When you read this, when you see it, you understand that attempts can indeed be made to distort these facts. But you can at least read these documents. I can understand the current Polish leadership’s attitude to the 1939 events, but when you tell them: Just take a look at what happened slightly before that, when Poland joined Germany in the division of Czechoslovakia. You lit the fuse, you pulled the cork, the genie came out, and you cannot put it back into the bottle.”

I also read the archival documents which we received after the Red Army entered Europe: we have German and also Polish and French documents, we have them. They directly discussed the division of Czechoslovakia and the time for the invasion. And then to blame it on the Soviet Union? This simply does not correspond to reality and facts.

Simply put, who attacked who? Did the Soviet Union attack Germany? No, it did not. Yes, there were secret agreements between Germany and the Soviet Union. Incidentally, I would like to note that the Soviet troops entered Brest when the German troops had been already deployed there; the Germans simply moved back a little and the Red Army moved in. Do you see?

There is no point adding a political dimension here. Let us act calmly at the expert level, read the documents and sort things out. Nobody is accusing the Polish leadership. But we will not allow anyone to accuse Russia or the Soviet Union of what they did not do.

And lastly, I would like to say that there are some perfectly obvious things. Firstly, it was Germany that attacked the Soviet Union on June 22, 1941, and not vice versa, and secondly, let us not forget who stormed Berlin. Was it the Americans, the British or the French? No, it was the Red Army. Have you forgotten this? It is easy to recall, for it is an obvious fact.

As many as 1.1 million of our people died in the Battle of Stalingrad alone. How many casualties can Britain claim? 400,000. And the United States, less that 500,000. A total of 75 percent, and probably even 80 percent of the German military potential was destroyed by the Soviet army. Are you a little rusty on this?

No, you are not rusty at all. These events are being used to deal with the current internal political matters in an opportunistic manner. This is wrong, because nothing good will come of manipulating history. At the very least, this does not promote mutual understanding, which we need so badly now.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Orietta Moscatelli, go ahead please.

Orietta Moscatelli: Orietta Moscatelli, Italy. Thank you for the meeting.

As you mentioned, different things have been said about Homo sovieticus over the 30 years since the Soviet Union’s disintegration. Was there really a person like that? Here is my question: Do you think it was true? Do you believe Russia has fully overcome Soviet experience as a society? What are the main features of the Soviet times that you have kept in your life?

Vladimir Putin: I, as well as many people of my generation certainly remember this idea and this formula – a new community, Soviet people, the Soviet person. Of course, all of us remember this. In reality, this definition is not at all bad. This is my first point.

The second point. Look, the whole world and the United States describe the US as a “melting pot,” in which people of different nations, ethnicities and religions are melting together. What is bad about this? They are all proud – the Irish, people of European and East European origin, you name it, as well as Latin Americans and Africans by their initial descent – many of them are proud to be US citizens and this is wonderful. This is what “the melting pot” is about.

Russia is also “a melting pot.” Since the formation of a united Russian state – the first steps were made, probably in the 8th-9th centuries, and also after Conversion of Rus’, the Russian nation and a centralised Russian state began to take shape with a common market, common language, the power of a prince and common spiritual values. The Russian state began to be established and later expanded. This was also a “melting pot.”

Nothing particularly new was created in the Soviet Union except one very important circumstance: this new community, the Soviet person, the Soviet people acquired an ideological tinge. Of course, there was nothing good about this because this narrows the horizons of the possible. This is the first point.

The second point. Positive features of the Soviet times reflected on the Soviet people. What were they? Patriotism inherent in our peoples, supremacy of the spiritual dimension over material things, all these values I mentioned, including family ones. But negative things in the life and destiny of the Soviet Union also stuck to the Soviet people. Thus, they were deprived of property as such. Private property was embodied in a household plot, but this is quite a different category. Hence, their attitude to labour, the one-size-fits-all approach and so on.

The Soviet Union had many problems. They triggered the events that led to the collapse of the USSR. However, it is wrong, crude and inappropriate to paint everything black. Yes, I know we have people that paint everything black. Hence, they deserve to be put into something that smells bad.

There are both pluses and minuses, as for “the melting pot,” I think it was good to have it because it enriches the people, enriches the nation.

You know, what is typical of Russia, something you can find in all historical documents: when expanding its territory Russia never made life difficult for the people who became part of the united Russian state. This applied to religion, traditions and history. Look at the decrees of Catherine the Great who issued her instruction in clear terms: treat with respect. This was the attitude towards those who preached Islam, for instance. This has always been the case. This is a tradition. In terms of preserving these traditions, the new community of the Soviet people had nothing bad about it except the ideologisation of this melting pot and the results of its functioning.

I think I have described everything linked with the Soviet period of our history. Now I have mentioned this again and I do not think it is worth discussing this topic again.

As for me, like the overwhelming majority of people of my generation, I faced the problems of that period, but I also remember its positive features that should not be forgotten. Being from a family of workers, yours truly graduated from Leningrad State University. This is something, right? At that time, education played the role of a real social lift. On the whole, the egalitarian approach was very widespread and we encountered its negative impact, such as income levelling and a related attitude to work, but a lot of people still used the preferences of social lifts I mentioned. Maybe, it was simply the legacy of past generations or even cultivated in the Soviet Union to some extent. This is also important.

I have now recalled my family. My mum and dad were simple people. They did not talk in slogans but I remember very well that discussing different problems at home, in the family, they always, I would like to emphasise this, treated their country with respect, speaking about it in their own manner, in simple terms, in the folk style. This was not demonstrative patriotism. It was inside our family.

I think I have the right to say that the overwhelming majority of the Russian people and the other peoples of the USSR cultivated these positive features. It is no accident that over 70 percent of the population voted for preserving the Soviet Union on the eve of its collapse. Many people in the union republics that gained independence regretted what had happened. But now life is different and we believe it is going its own way and generally recognise current realities.

As for the Soviet person, the new formation, as they said then, I believe I have already said enough on this subject.

Fyodor Lukyanov: This year’s Valdai Club meeting is special in part because we have a Nobel Peace Prize laureate here with us for the first time in our history.

I would like to give the floor to Dmitry Muratov.

Dmitry Muratov: Thank you. Good afternoon.

Mr President, Valdai Club guests, Fyodor, I want to let everyone know that the prize money has been distributed.

Thanks go to the Circle of Kindness Foundation. Furthermore, we hope that our modest contribution will help everyone realise that the Circle of Kindness Foundation helps young people under 18, but then after they are 18, they are left without guidance. It is like saying, “Thank you, we saved you, and now goodbye.” We look forward to the Circle of Kindness Foundation (they appear ready to do this) expanding its mandate. There is the children's hospice Lighthouse, the First Moscow Charity Hospice Foundation Vera, the Podari Zhizn Foundation, the Anna Politkovskaya Award, and the Foundation for Medical Aid for Media Members. That is all.

Of course, I also think that, to some extent, probably, this is a prize for our country as well, although I consider myself an impostor. I will do my best to make sure it benefits our people.

Now, if I may, a brief remark and a question.

Mr President, I have very carefully studied the answer you gave during Moscow Energy Week regarding foreign agents, where you said that we were not the first to adopt this law, that the United States did so back in the 1930s.

But, Mr President, since we do not adopt every law that is adopted in the United States, my question about foreign agents remains. After all, I believe this concerns not only dozens and dozens of journalists and human rights activists who are listed in the register, but also hundreds of thousands and even millions of readers. Therefore, I believe it is a serious matter.

Most importantly, you have just mentioned Leningrad University and I think your subject of study will help us understand each other well. This law does not provide for any court recourse. You are designated a foreign agent and there is no argument of the parties, no provision of evidence, no verdict. It is a stain. Let me remind you of our favourite childhood book. This is the same kind of brand Milady in The Three Musketeers had. But before Milady was beheaded, the executioner of Lille read the verdict to her at dawn whereas in our case there is no verdict whatsoever.

Furthermore, it is impossible to get away from this law. There is not even a warning that you become a foreign agent starting, say, tomorrow. For many, this status undoubtedly means they are an enemy of the Motherland. I remember from my days of army service that under the guard service regulations, the sentry first fires a warning shot in the air. Excuse me, but only security guards at prison camps shoot to kill without a warning shot.

I believe we need to sort this out, since the criteria are woefully vague. Take, for example, receiving organisational and methodological assistance. What does this mean? If I am asking a member of the Valdai Club for a comment, and they come from another country, does that make me a foreign agent? They make their announcements on Fridays. I want to remind you that tomorrow is Friday.

I would like to ask you to respond to the way this issue is presented. Perhaps, you, Mr President and, for example, the State Duma Chairman, could hold an extraordinary meeting with the editors from various media in order discuss the issues at hand.

Thank you very much.

Vladimir Putin: First, I would like to congratulate you on the Nobel Prize. I would like to draw your attention to one fact: Nikolai Berdyayev, whom I have mentioned, was expelled by the Bolsheviks on the well-known Philosophy Steamer in 1922. Nominated for a Nobel Prize more than once, he never received this award.

Dmitry Muratov: That was about literature.

Vladimir Putin: No difference, but yes, I agree. The first Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev and Barrack Obama also received Nobel peace prizes. So, you are in good company. Congratulations! But we really know. You have just spoken about a hospice. I would give you a prize for that because you are doing this good work. It is truly noble work, the Circle of Kindness, and the like.

Your concern about foreign agents; I will not deviate to the right or left. Look, you said that here when these decisions are made… firstly, American laws. Do we have to copy everything from the Americans? No, we do not need to copy everything. Yet many liberals in Russia still think we should copy almost everything. But I agree with you: not everything.

You said this is not decided in court. This is not done in the United States either. They summon people to the Department of Justice. Ask Russia Today about what they are doing. Do you know how tough they are? Up to and including criminal liability. We do not have this. This is not about the position of some public figure, some public organisation, or a media outlet. Their position does not matter. This law does not ban anyone from having one’s own opinion on an issue. It is about receiving financial aid from abroad during domestic political activities. That is the point. The law does not even keep them from continuing these political activities. The money that comes from abroad, from over there, should simply be identified as such. Russian society should know what position someone comes from or what they think about internal political processes or something else, but it should also realise that they receive money from abroad. This is the right of Russian society. In fact, this is the whole point of this law. There are no restrictions in it at all.

So, when you said there is no verdict, that is right. There is no verdict. There was a verdict for Milady – her head was cut off. Here nobody is cutting off anything. So, just continue working like you did before.

But you are right about one thing. I will not even argue with you, because this is true. Of course, we probably need to go over these vague criteria again and again. I can promise you that we will take another look at them. I know it happens occasionally. Even my personal acquaintances who engage in charitable activities were telling me that cases were being made against them portraying them as foreign agents. I am aware of the fact that our colleagues discuss this at the Human Rights Council. I keep issuing instructions on that score to the Presidential Administration and the State Duma deputies so that they go over it again and again, improve this tool, and in no way abuse it.

So, thank you for bringing this up. We will look into it.

Thank you very much.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Just a quick follow-up on that. Mr President, are you not afraid of excessive acts?

Vladimir Putin: I am not afraid of anything, why is everyone trying to scare me?

Fyodor Lukyanov: Okay, then we are afraid, and you tell us about excessive acts, since you know your former security service colleagues well.

Vladimir Putin: Not everyone, this is a mass organisation, how can I know everyone?

Fyodor Lukyanov: Well, not everyone, but many.

Vladimir Putin: When I was [FSB]director, I sometimes even summoned operatives with specific cases and read them myself. And now I do not know everyone there. I left it a long time ago.

Fyodor Lukyanov: I am talking about specific cases. Their psychological makeup is that overdoing things is a safer approach than missing things. Will there be no blanket approach to identifying foreign agents?

Vladimir Putin: What?

Fyodor Lukyanov: Will they not use a blanket approach to identifying foreign agents?

Vladimir Putin: Is there anything there that looks like a blanket approach? How many do we have? Every second, or what? I believe there is no such thing as widespread branding of people as foreign agents.

I think the danger is vastly exaggerated. I believe I have formulated the underlying reasons for adopting this law quite clearly.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Good. In addition to a Nobel prize winner, we also have a foreign agent in the audience.

Margarita Simonyan, please share your experience.

Margarita Simonyan: Yes, thank you, good afternoon,

We have been foreign agents for many years now. Moreover, I was summoned for interrogation in the United States several years ago, because we did not register as foreign agents earlier, despite the fact that our lawyers, including former rather high-ranking officials from the US Department of Justice (Dima, this information is mostly for you, congratulations on winning the prize), told us – and we have these legal opinions in writing – that this law does not apply to us, because it clearly said in English “except the media.”

But when our audience started growing, and we got in their way, they told us: “We do not care what the Department of Justice is telling you, you either register or go to prison for five years.” And I have a summons for questioning because I myself failed to register earlier, before they registered me. I do not travel there anymore, just in case, because I might be jailed. This is my first point.

Vladimir Putin: There is no fence against ill fortune, Margarita.

(Addressing Dmitry Muratov) You see, in the United States, some people face a five-year sentence.

Margarita Simonyan: Yes, five. And we know people who are doing time under this law, five years.

Secondly, unlike in Russia, this law definitely has consequences and implies sanctions. For example, one’s accreditation to Congress gets instantly revoked, and if you are not accredited with Congress in the United States, you can no longer go anywhere – not a single event, nowhere (I can see people that know this nodding their heads). You actually work on semi-underground terms there. This is how we have been working for how long now? Six years. But we will continue to do this work.

Mr President, as a mother of three young children, I would like to thank you very much for your healthy conservatism. I am terrified by the thought of my 7-year-old son being asked to choose a gender, or my 2-year-old daughter being told from all mobile devices, and even at school, as is now happening in many Western countries, that her future is that of a “person with human milk who gave birth to a baby.” And the thought that these tentacles of liberal fascism, so-called liberal, will reach us and our children. I really hope that this will never be allowed in our country, despite its great openness.

You mentioned bloviating, which the so-called humanistic foundation of the European political thought turned out to be, but this so-called freedom of speech turned out to be bloviating too. Freedom of speech turned out to be a postcard made for the people we were in the 1990s, so that we could look at it and think: “Wow, it does exist. Great, we will do that too, we will not have foreign agents, and everything will be fine with us.” This freedom of speech has just strangled our YouTube channel, which was very popular, and everything was cool there, really. And you know very well that this is not a privately-run outfit, but a public project which we created not for ourselves, but for the Motherland, and we have run out of options to get this project back. And we no longer believe in anything other than reciprocal measures.

According to their own analyses, Deutsche Welle was behind us in Germany in certain rankings. It broadcasts in Russia without any problems, but we cannot broadcast there. We have already built studios, hired people, produced shows and earned an audience, but now, with the strike of a pen and without any reason, and, Mr Muratov, without a court ruling, everything fell apart in a single moment.

This is no a question actually, I am asking, pleading for protection, Mr President. I do not see any other way to protect us other than through retaliatory measures.

My question is the following. Moscow has recently hosted a Congress of Compatriots, and you sent greetings to the participants. I took the floor at this forum and asked those of my colleagues in the audience, people who are proactive in defending the Russian world and the Russian language around the world, sometimes putting their lives and freedom at risk, who wanted but could not obtain Russian citizenship, to raise their hands. Half the audience had their hands up.

We have discussed this many times. You may remember that several years ago we spoke about granting citizenship to Donbass residents. The procedure was streamlined for them. Can this be done for all Russians? Why is Russia shying away from doing this? The Jews did not hesitate about it, and neither did the Germans nor the Greeks, but we are hesitating. This is my question. Thank you very much.

Vladimir Putin: First, regarding the retaliatory measures, I think we need to be cautious when someone makes mistakes like this, and I do believe that you have suffered from them, when a channel is closed or you are unable to work. I know about the fact that your accounts were blocked and that you could not open, etc. There is a plethora of instruments to this effect.

Margarita Simonyan: More like carpet-bombing.

Vladimir Putin: Yes, to make it impossible for you to work there. I know.

On the one hand, of course, they are infringing on freedom of speech and so forth, which is a bad thing. But since they are doing this, you and I have to think about how to spread the word about the fact that they are cancelling you, and then more people will become interested in what you do.

Margarita Simonyan: The only problem is that there is no place for people to watch us. People are interested, but there is nowhere to watch us.

Vladimir Putin: I do understand, but we need to give this some thought, and explore technical and technological opportunities.

As for retaliatory measures, let me reiterate that what matters the most is that they do not turn out to be counterproductive. I do not oppose them, but I do not want them to be counterproductive.

As for your question on Russian citizenship, you are right. My position is that we need to improve this tool. There are questions here related to socioeconomic matters: clinics, kindergartens, jobs, housing, etc. Still, the citizenship laws must become increasingly liberal. This is obvious. By the way, this is what the labour market compels us to do. We are thinking about this.

Margarita Simonyan: Thank you, Mr President.

Vladimir Putin: Thank you.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Colleagues, in addition to those in this room, there are other participants who are watching us online, as they could not join us here due to the well-known circumstances.

I would like to ask – Robert Legvold, our longtime friend, member of the Valdai Research Council, professor at Columbia University.

Robert Legvold: Thank you very much, Fyodor. For me, it is a disappointment that I have not been able to be with all of the participants in the Valdai conference, but I am particularly pleased to have this opportunity to be part of this session. The topic of Valdai this year has been very transcendent and fundamental questions, and I admire Valdai for doing that.

President Putin has certainly risen to the challenge of that agenda and has addressed it in an extremely engaging and revealing fashion.

My question, however, is narrower but more specific, and I apologise for descending to this level, but it is a question that is important in my country. I think it is important in your country. Although neither your government nor the Biden administration believes that a reset of the US-Russian relationship is possible at this juncture, how do you evaluate or assess the evolution of US-Russia relations since your meeting with President Biden in June? In what areas has there been progress, if any? And what, in your view, are the obstacles to further progress? Thank you very much.

Vladimir Putin: On the whole, I have spoken about this; I have answered questions like this. I can only repeat myself now. On second thought, not just repeat – there is actually something to be said about what is happening.

The meeting in Geneva was generally productive, and it seemed to us – when I say ‘us,’ I mean my colleagues and myself – that overall, the administration was interested in building ties, reviving them at least in some important areas.

What did we agree on? We agreed to begin consultations on strategic stability, and the consultations began and are held regularly, on cybersecurity issues as well. At the expert level, cooperation has started. So we can safely say that although the scope of matters we agreed on was limited, we are on the right track nonetheless.

These are the most important matters for today. And in general, the administration (on the American side) and Russia (on the other side) are fulfilling the plans and are moving along this path. And when this happens, as we know, it is always a sign, one of a systemic nature. And now, look, our trade has already grown by 23 percent and in many areas. This, among other things, is an indirect effect of our meeting in Geneva.

So, overall, we are on the right track, although, unfortunately – I would not like to talk about sad things now, but we also see certain backslides, remember that phrase we used years ago – one step forward, two steps back – this is also happening sometimes. Still, we are progressing in line with our general agreements.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Thank you. Since we are in a new world now, for balance, I will give the floor to our kind friend Zhou Bo from Tsinghua University in Beijing.

Go ahead, please.

Zhou Bo: Mr President, it is really my great honour to ask you this question. First of all, let me thank you for this opportunity. I will ask you something about Afghanistan. Afghanistan lies in the heart of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation. So, if Afghanistan has a problem, then the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation has a problem. Now the United States has withdrawn from Afghanistan. So how can the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation, which is led by China and Russia, united with other countries, help Afghanistan to achieve political stability and economic development? Thank you.

Vladimir Putin: The situation in Afghanistan is one of the most urgent issues today. You know, we have just had a meeting in the appropriate format, in part, with representatives of the Taliban. The People’s Republic of China (PRC) is also active in Afghanistan. This is a very serious issue for all of us because for both China and Russia it is extremely important to have a calm, developing Afghanistan that is not a source of terrorism, or any form of radicalism, next to our national borders, if not on our borders.

We are now seeing what is happening inside Afghanistan. Unfortunately, different groups, including ISIS are still there. There are already victims among the Taliban movement, which, as a whole, is still trying to get rid of these radical elements and we know of such examples. This is very important for us, for both Russia and China.

In order to normalise the situation properly and at the right pace, it is necessary, of course, to help Afghanistan restore its economy because drugs are another huge problem. It is a known fact that 90 percent of opiates come to the world market from Afghanistan. And if there is no money, what will they do? From what sources and how will they fund their social programmes?

Therefore, for all the importance of our participation in these processes – both China and Russia and other SCO countries – the main responsibility for what is happening there is still borne by the countries that fought there for 20 years. I believe the first thing they must do is to release Afghan assets and give Afghanistan an opportunity to resolve high priority socio-economic problems.

For our part, we can implement specific large projects and deal with domestic security issues. Our special services are in contact with their Afghan counterparts. For us, within the SCO, it is very important to get this work up and running because Tajikistan and Uzbekistan are right on the border with Afghanistan. We have a military facility in Tajikistan. It was based on the 201st division when it was still Soviet.

Therefore, we will actively continue this work with China on a bilateral plane, develop dialogue with relevant structures and promote cooperation within the SCO as a whole. In the process, we will allocate the required resources and create all the conditions to let our citizens feel safe regardless of what is happening in Afghanistan.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Thank you.

Mikhail Pogrebinsky, please.

Mikhail Pogrebinsky: Thank you, Fyodor. Thank you, Mr President.

I will try to ask a question, the answer to which is awaited, I am sure, by hundreds of thousands of people in my homeland.

You mentioned a Chinese proverb about living in a time of change. Our country has been living like that for almost 30 years now, and the situation is becoming more difficult in anticipation of winter, amid the pandemic, and, I would say, the situation with the Americans. A couple of days ago, we had Defence Secretary Lloyd Austin visit our country. He brought $60 million worth of weapons and promised us a bright future as a NATO member, figuratively speaking.

I will note right away that any allegations that NATO is irrelevant because Europe does not agree, are prevarication. One does not need to be a NATO member to have US or British military infrastructure deployed in Ukraine. I believe this process is already underway.

In your July article on historical unity, you wrote that transforming Ukraine into an anti-Russia country is unacceptable for millions of people. This is true, and opinion polls confirm it. Over 40 percent have good or very good thoughts about Russia. However, this transformation has, in fact, started. A rather long and very dangerous, in my opinion, distance in this direction may have already been covered. I think that if this idea with a para-NATO infrastructure continues to be implemented, the process to form what is now a not so stable anti-Russia Ukraine will be cemented for many years to come.

You wrote in your article that if the process continues unabated, it will pose a serious threat to the Russian state, and this may be fraught with Ukraine losing its statehood. People who oppose this movement are facing reprisals. You are aware that they are trying to put Viktor Medvedchuk in prison based on some outlandish charges.

How, in your opinion, can this process be stopped? Maybe, you have a timeline for when it might happen? What can be done in this regard at all?

Thank you.

Vladimir Putin: Unfortunately, I will probably have to disappoint you – I do not yet know the answer to this question. On the one hand, it seems to lie on the surface: the easiest thing is to say that the Ukrainian people must make a decision themselves, and form the bodies of power and administration that would meet their needs and expectations. From one perspective, this is indeed true.

But on the other hand, there is another perspective, and I cannot avoid mentioning it. You have just mentioned Viktor Medvedchuk, who has been charged with high treason. For what? Did he steal some secrets and illegally disclose them to a third party? No. What then? Was it his open political position about stabilising Ukraine’s internal affairs and building relations with its neighbours because those relations are extremely important for Ukraine itself? It is concerning that such people are not allowed to raise their heads. Some of them end up killed, and others locked up.

One gets the impression that the Ukrainian people are not allowed and will not be allowed to legally form the bodies of power that would uphold their interests. The people there are even afraid to respond to polls. They are scared, because the small group that has appropriated the victory in the fight for independence holds radical political views. And that group actually runs the country, regardless of the name of the current head of state.

At least this is how it was until recently: people ran for leadership positions relying on voters in the Southeast, but once elected, they almost immediately changed their political positions to the opposite. Why? Because that silent majority voted for them in the hope that they would fulfil their campaign promises, but the loud and aggressive nationalist minority suppressed all freedom in decision-making that the Ukrainian people expected, and they, in fact, are running the country.

This is a dead end. I do not even know how this can be changed. We will wait and see what happens in Ukraine’s political affairs in the near future.

For our part, we are making every effort to improve these relations. But the threat you just spoke about — not even spoke about, only mentioned — is quite important to us. And you are right that formal NATO membership may never happen, but military expansion on the territory is already underway, and this really poses a threat to the Russian Federation, we are aware of this.

Consider what happened in the late 1980s – early 1990s (I will not tell the whole story now, although you just made me think about talking more about it), when everyone assured us that an eastward expansion of NATO infrastructure after the unification of Germany was totally out of the question. Russia could be absolutely sure of this, at the very least, so they said. But those were public statements. What happened in reality? They lied. And now they challenge us to produce a document that actually said that.

They expanded NATO once, and then expanded it twice. What are the military-strategic consequences? Their infrastructure is getting closer. What kind of infrastructure? They deployed ABM (anti-missile) systems in Poland and Romania, using Aegis launchers, where Tomahawks can be loaded, strike systems. This can be done easily, with the click of a button. Just change the software – and that is it, no one will even notice. Medium and short-range missiles can also be deployed there. Why not? Has anyone even reacted to our statement that we will not deploy this kind of missile in the European part if we produce them, if they tell us that no one will do so from the United States or Europe? No. They never responded. But we are adults, we are all adults here. What should we do in this situation?

The Minister of Defence arrives, who, in fact, opens the doors for Ukraine to NATO. In fact, his statement must and can be interpreted in this way. He says every country has the right to choose. And nobody says no, nobody. Even those Europeans you mentioned. I know, I spoke to them personally.

But one official is not a security guarantee for Russia – he may be here one day and he might be replaced the next. What will happen then? This is not a security guarantee; it is just a conversation on a given topic. And we are naturally concerned.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Mr President, since you mentioned NATO…

Vladimir Putin: Yes, sorry. About the bases – I know about the corresponding clauses in the Ukrainian constitution. It allows setting up training centers. But these can be anything at all, accounted for as a training center. As I already said, and it was also said publicly: what if tomorrow there are missiles near Kharkov – what should we do then? We do not go there with our missiles – but missiles are being brought to our doorstep. Of course, we have a problem here.

Fyodor Lukyanov: We started talking about NATO. NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg was interviewed just two days ago, and he announced that NATO is adjusting its strategic vision somewhat, and now views Russia and China as one common threat rather than two threats. This is an interesting approach, apparently a far-reaching one. But if this is how they see us, maybe it is time for us to unite with China and consider someone else as a threat?

Vladimir Putin: We have said many times that we are friends with China, and not against anyone else, but in each other’s interests. This is the first point. The second point is, as distinct from NATO, from the NATO countries, we are not creating a closed military bloc. There is no Russia-China military bloc and we will not create one now. So, there is no reason to talk about this.

Fyodor Lukyanov: I see.

Mark Champion.

Mark Champion: Thank you. Mr President, on the subject of the potential for sending extra gas to Europe, which, as you know, is in a gas crisis at the moment, you have talked about this before, but, you know, at times it has been quite confusing. Sometimes Russian officials indicate that there is additional gas available that can be sent if Nord Stream 2 is opened, and at other times, they have suggested that there is no gas available to send to Europe. And I just wondered if you would take this opportunity to clarify whether there is additional gas available that Russia can send to Europe, if say, Nord Stream opened tonight, or if there is not.

Vladimir Putin: Frankly, it is strange for me to hear questions like this. It seems to me I explained everything during the Russian Energy Week in Moscow. However, if these questions are being asked, we should certainly talk more about it.

Look what is happening. I believe I said at the meeting with the Government yesterday or the day before yesterday: this is not just about energy sources or gas, but also about the state of the global economy. Shortages are increasing in the leading, economically advanced countries. Take the United States, for one. It has recently made yet another decision to increase its national debt.

For those who do not deal with the economy, I can tell you what a decision to increase the national debt means. The FRS will print money and put it at the government’s disposal. This is emission. The deficit is increasing, and inflation is increasing as an emission derivative. This leads to price increases on energy sources, on electricity. This is how it works, not the other way around.

However, the situation is also deteriorating due to realities in the energy market. What are these realities? You just spoke about Europe. What is going on in Europe? Maybe I will repeat some of my ideas or maybe I will say something new, if I recall it. In the past few years, the European Commission’s philosophy was entirely devoted to regulating the market of energy sources, including gas, via a commodities exchange, through the so-called spot market. They tried to persuade us to give up long-term contracts where prices were tied to the exchange, that is, market quotes on crude oil and petroleum products.

Incidentally, this is market price formation. Since gas prices are established with a lag of six months after a change in oil prices, this is, firstly, a more stable situation and, secondly, a six-month lag allows consumers and suppliers to make adjustments along the way based on developments on world markets.

So, everything began to be brought to this spot market, but it largely holds gas on paper, not real gas. These are not physical amounts, which are not increasing (I will explain why in a minute). A figure is written on paper, but there is no physical amount, it is declining. So, a cold winter requires gas from underground storage; a wind-free hot summer means a lack of wind generation on the necessary scale. I have already mentioned the macroeconomic reasons, and these are the sector-based reasons.

What happened next on the European market? First, a decline in production in the gas producing countries. Production in Europe fell by 22.5 billion cubic metres during the first six months. This is first. Second, gas storage facilities were underfilled by 18.5 billion cubic metres and are only 71 percent full. The gas storage facilities were underfilled by 18.5 during the first six months of the year. If you look at annual consumption, this number must be doubled.

Primarily American, along with Middle Eastern companies withdrew 9 billion cubic metres from the European market and redirected the gas to Latin America and Asia. By the way, when the Europeans were formulating the principles governing the formation of the gas market in Europe, and said that all gas must be traded on the spot market, they were proceeding from the assumption that the European market is a premium market. But the European market is no longer a premium market, you see? It is no longer a premium market. Gas was redirected to Latin America and Asia.

I have already said that 18.5 billion cubic metres, plus double that amount, 9 billion (undersupplied to the European market from the United States and the Middle East), plus a decline in production of 22.5 billion – the deficit on the European market may amount to about 70 billion cubic metres, which is a lot. What does Russia have to do with it? This is the result of the European Commission’s economic policy. Russia has nothing to do with it.

Russia, including Gazprom, has increased deliveries to the European market by 8.7 percent, I believe, and deliveries to non-CIS countries by 12 percent, I think. But when we speak about non-CIS countries, we mean China as well. This is also good for the international market, because we are increasing deliveries to the global market, and increased deliveries to the European market by 8.7. In absolute terms, this represents over 11 billion cubic metres of gas. American and Middle Eastern companies undersupplied by 9 billion, while Gazprom increased its supplies by more than 11 billion.

Can everyone hear me? Not in this audience, but the so-called stakeholders. Someone out there is cutting supplies to you, while we are increasing them.

But this is not all. Today, under the so-called long-term contracts – I would like you to listen attentively and to hear what I say – the price of gas is now $1,200 or $1,150 for a thousand cubic metres. European companies that have long-term contracts with Gazprom receive it – take note – at four times less than the current price! Gazprom does not make any windfall profits. We are not concerned about this because we are interested in long-term contracts and long-term mutual commitments. In this case, we ensure the opportunity to invest in production and produce the required amounts for our consumers steadily and reliably.

You are asking me if it is possible to increase supplies. Yes, this is possible. Speaking about Nord Stream-2, its first line is filled with gas and if the German regulator issues the permit for shipping tomorrow, it can deliver 17.5 billion cubic metres of gas the day after tomorrow.

Technological work on filling the second line of Nord Stream-2 will be completed before the end of this year, in mid- or late December. The total volume is 55 billion cubic metres of gas. Considering that in our estimate the shortage of gas in the European market will reach 70 billion cubic metres, 55 billion is a decent amount.

Once the second line is filled, and the German regulator issues its permit, we can start supplies on the next day. Is this possible or not, you asked. Yes, it is possible, but one must have a responsible attitude to one’s commitments and work on this.

By the way, we keep saying: Nord Stream-2, Gazprom… But there are five European companies taking part in this project. Why do you mention Gazprom alone? Have you forgotten about them? Five major European companies are working on this project. So, this affects not only the interests of Gazprom but also the interests of our partners, primarily in Europe, of course.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Mr President, to an extent, Nord Stream 2, which is now on everyone’s lips, can be viewed as your joint achievement with Angela Merkel. Do you regret that she is leaving office? Will you miss her?

Vladimir Putin: The decision on her departure was not mine, after all, but hers. She could have run for another term. She stayed in power for 16 years.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Not a long tenure, at all.

Vladimir Putin: You cannot say that this is not long enough. Quite a tenure. Helmut Koehl, who unified Germany, also spent 16 years at the top.

As for the Nord Streams, we started this process back in the Schroeder days. At the time, when we were working on Nord Stream 1, there were similar attempts to undermine this process, just like today. It was all the same. Fortunately, today this pipeline delivers gas to Europe and Germany, and the volumes are quite high.

By the way, we are all talking about green energy. This is important, of course. If there are questions on this subject, I will try to explain how I see this. As for the Russian natural gas, let me emphasise that it has a three times lower carbon footprint compared to LNG from the United States. If the environmental activists are not guided in their efforts by a political agenda and really do care about the future of humanity, they cannot fail to hear this. They must oppose the construction of and demand that all LNG terminals are closed.

Unfortunately, the same applies to Ukraine’s gas transit system. I have already said that Nord Stream 2 is a modern, state-of-the-art pipeline that can handle higher pressure. There are absolutely no emissions involved when you deliver gas via the bottom of the Baltic Sea. The compression stations are like small factories. They are gas-fired and also emit CO2 into the atmosphere. Emissions from Nord Stream 2 are 5.6 times lower compared to Ukrainian gas transits, because the system there is old and has been in use since the Soviet times. Environmental activists should have said: “Immediately close down the Ukrainian gas transit!” But no, it is the opposite: “Go ahead and increase supplies through Ukraine.” How is that possible?

In fact, it is the same with oil. Even if we leave gas alone, since I have already talked about this at length, what is going on with oil? In think that from 2012 until 2016 annual investment in oil extraction was at about $400 billion, but in the years that preceded the pandemic investment decreased by 40 percent, and now stands at $260 million. This is a cycle that lasts for 15 to 30 years. Do you understand this?

In my opinion, what are current problems on top of what I have said? I talked about various political issues. This is one of the important topics that springs to mind. There is a lack of overlap between political and investment cycles in the leading economies, including in energy, a very important sector. How long is a political cycle? Four or five years. What do the leading political forces, parties and politicians do all this time? They make promises. They promise everything, as much as possible and at the lowest cost. This applies, among other things, to the green economy. What comes out of this? Banks stop funding investment, and investment dwindles. The time will come like what we are seeing today, when the market will need to accomplish a breakthrough, but there will be nothing to back this effort. Even today, OPEC Plus countries are increasing oil production even slightly above their agreement, but not all oil producing countries can increase output quickly. This is a long-term process, and the cycle is quite long.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Please, Raghida Dergham.

Raghida Dergham: Thank you very much, Fyodor.

Mr President, it is good to see you again in Valdai and Sochi. My name is Raghida Dergham. I am the founder and executive chairman of Beirut Institute. So I have come to you, I have come to Sochi, from Lebanon, a very wounded country. I am sure, sir, that you are aware of the explosion that took place – the fourth largest – at the port, the civilian port of Beirut. There has been an attempt to investigate what happened, the story itself. There was a Russian captain, there was a Georgian owner of the ship.

There was a request to you, Mr President, to share – the request came to you from the judiciary, and it is an independent body from the government – to share what you have, from your satellite pictures, to tell us, to help find the story, this horrible story that happened, that amounted to the assassination of the city, of the capital. My first question, sir: are you willing to share now the information you have, the satellite information, and to lend cooperation to this investigation so that, you know, the values that you spoke about are implemented where it really matters?

And secondly, your two allies, Hezbollah and Iran, have been resisting and, in fact, have been demanding the dislodging of the – not the prosecutor, he is really the investigator – the judge who is investigating the case. They have issued a warning that if – to both friends of yours, the President, Michel Aoun and the Prime Minister, Najib Mikati – that if they do not dislodge this investigator, this judge, then the government will fall. Do you support such a position, particularly given that this country is on the verge of a civil war, with Mr Nasrallah announcing that he will not back down, announcing, at the same time, that there are a hundred thousand fighters ready to launch? So, this is a civil war in the action, maybe, right next door to a prize accomplishment of yours, Mr Vladimir Putin, which is in Syria. I thank you.

Vladimir Putin: Just a minute, please. Can you explain the beginning of which war you are talking about? I do not understand.

Raghida Dergham: Civil war, because, you see, there are armed people on the streets already. You do remember the civil war in Lebanon, and right now… Hezbollah is not the only armed group, I am not claiming that. There are many armed groups, but right now the conflict is over this investigator. His name is Tariq al-Bitar. The insistence of Hezbollah is that he needs to be dislodged. And, in fact, this is interfering with the very principle of the separation of powers, and that led to confrontations on the streets and the possibility of a civil war really happening, Mr President. Do not dismiss that possibility; it is a very scary one. And I am not sure at all it would be in the interests of the Russian policy even for Syria, never mind for Lebanon, and we wish that you will pay attention to Lebanon, particularly after hearing you today emphasise these values.

Vladimir Putin: First, about the explosion in the port of Beirut. Frankly speaking, when that tragedy happened – I would like to once again offer my condolences to the Lebanese people over it, the large number of casualties and catastrophic damage – I learned about it from media reports, of course.

Many years ago, ammonium nitrate was delivered to and stored in the port; the local authorities did not give it the attention it needed, although, as far as I know, they wanted to sell it profitably. And that desire to sell at a profit came into conflict with the possibility of doing so, with the market and some internal contradictions related to who would get the profit, and so on. In my opinion, this is the main reason for the tragedy, and that is it.

As for helping with the investigation, frankly speaking, I do not understand how satellite pictures can help, and whether we even have any. However, I promise that I will make inquiries, and if we do have anything and can provide assistance to the investigation, we will do this. But first I need to discuss the matter with my colleagues who may have this information.

As for Hezbollah, Iran and so on, regarding the situation in Lebanon. Take Hezbollah: different people in different countries have a different attitude to it, which I am well aware of. Hezbollah is a serious political force in Lebanon itself. But there is no doubt that we always, including in Lebanon, call for settling any conflicts through dialogue. We have always tried to do this, one way or another. We are maintaining contact with nearly all political forces in Lebanon, and we will try to continue doing this in the future as well, so that the situation can be settled without any bloodshed. God forbid. Nobody is interested in this. The situation in the Middle East has been precarious recently as it is. Of course, we will do everything we can to convince all the parties to the internal political process to stick with common sense and to strive for agreements.

Please, take the microphone.

Raghida Dergham: President Vladimir Putin, do you support the ultimatum given by Hezbollah that either the investigator Tarek Bitar is dislodged or there is a downfall of the government? Do you support that ultimatum?

Vladimir Putin: Listen, colleague, we cannot comment on the internal political processes you have mentioned, whether we support an ultimatum of one of the sides or not, or one of the side’s positions. This would amount to taking the side of one of the conflicting parties, which would be counterproductive regarding the effectiveness of our peace-making efforts. Therefore, I would like to abstain from making such comments. As I have noted, the main thing is to find a platform that can be used as the basis for agreements, without any shooting, God willing. We in Russia are definitely interested in that.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Please, Stanislav Tkachenko.

Stanislav Tkachenko: Thank you.

Stanislav Tkachenko, St Petersburg State University.

Mr President, a question about energy. On October 13, Chief of the European External Action Service Josep Borrell first unveiled the Arctic Strategy and then sent it to the European Commission and the EU Council – a new EU document that considers a wide range of problems, including energy.

I would highlight two points in that strategy. First, the European Union believes that the mineral resources found in the Arctic – oil, gas and coal – should stay in the ground, including in the Arctic, and to achieve that, the world may even have to impose a temporary moratorium. The second point is linked to the first one. It concerns plans by the European Union and its member states to develop a series of instruments, financial and others, to prevent countries (perhaps primarily the Russian Federation), which will be selling energy resources on the global market, from selling the resources produced in the Arctic.

My question is: What is Russia’s attitude to this. Thanks.

Vladimir Putin: Right. To be honest, I try to follow what is happening there behind the European scenes, what is going on there every day, but at times, as our people say, I feel like I am missing something.

Regarding the EU's Arctic Strategy, what can I say? Russia has its own strategy for our presence in the Arctic – this is my first point. Second, we have always worked and are working quite productively; Russia is currently chairing the Arctic Council, where EU countries are also represented. Third, we have always talked about this, and I actually spoke about this at the meeting with President Biden and his team members in Geneva: we are ready to continue cooperation, in a broad sense, with all interested countries in the Arctic, within the framework of international law.

As you know, there are several conventions, on territorial waters, and on the law of the sea, from 1986, I think. We act on the basis of those internationally recognised documents, which Russia is a party to, and we are ready to build relations with all states including the European Union on the basis of those documents.

But if someone from the outside is trying to circumvent these internationally recognised documents and limit our sovereign right to use our own territory – according to international law, territorial waters are part of a coastal state’s territory – it is an infringement using mala fide means.

The same applies to the 400-mile zone, which is called the zone of preferential economic development. The rules that apply to that area are determined by international law, and we fully adhere to these requirements.

By the way, consider the Nord Stream project – in accordance with these rules, we had to request appropriate permits from the coastal states – Finland, Sweden, and Denmark – when we did not even have to enter their territorial sea, but the pipeline crossed those countries’ exclusive economic zones. This is a requirement of international law, and we abide by this law, and everyone, including Europeans, insisted that we acted within the framework of those international legal norms. Do they mean they are not going to abide by them now, or what? We are required to comply, but they can suddenly ignore them, is that it? It will not happen.

And if they want to restrict our activities, including in the energy sector, it is up to them, and they can try it. We can see what is happening in the world now, including in the European energy market. If they act like this, take categorical and poorly substantiated action, I doubt anything good will come of it.

I remember this popular fairy tale, at least with the Russian audience, where one of the characters makes a wolf fish in the ice-hole in winter using its tail as a rod, and then sits by the wolf’s side chanting quietly, ‘freeze, freeze wolf's tail.’ If the Europeans follow this path, they will find themselves in the same position as those characters in the Russian fairy tale.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Who is the wolf?

Vladimir Putin: It is not difficult to guess, I think.

Fyodor Lukyanov: I don’t get it, I really don’t. Do you mean Russia? They chant –

Vladimir Putin: The wolf is the one who has put its tail into an ice-hole in winter trying to catch some fish, in troubled water in this case – that's who. They will freeze. But of course, if they try to impose restrictions. They are already restricting investments, as I said, the investment period in the oil industry is 15–20, or even 30 years, and now banks are refusing to issue appropriate credit resources for these projects. Here you go – the shortage will be felt soon, and nothing can be done about it.

The problem is that, unfortunately, decisions in this area, in the energy sector, are made as part of political cycles, which I have already mentioned, and they are not made by experts. As one of my colleagues said, the decisions are not made by engineers, but by politicians who are not really competent in the matter, but they simply deceive their voters.

Everyone is alarmed by the climate agenda, which suggests a gloomy future unless we achieve a decrease in the temperature rise to its pre-industrial level, the level as of the beginning of industrialisation. Yes, we know. Between 1.5–2 degrees is the critical line, we know this. But this must be done carefully, while relying on a thorough and deep analysis, not on political slogans. But we can see that some countries are guided precisely by political slogans, which are not even feasible.

Still, no one can forbid us to act on our territory as we see fit. We are ready to negotiate with everyone, but we hope that it will be a professional conversation.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Mr President, you keep referring to international law, and have just mentioned it once again. So does Russian diplomacy. However, international law is not written in stone like Moses’ tablets. It results from a certain balance of power and interests, then it changes. Maybe it is time to adjust it?

Vladimir Putin: But these adjustments are always late, which applies to all kinds of law, including international norms. Social interactions and international relations change faster than the legal norms. This is a well-known tenet of state theory and law. Relations change quicker, they need to be regulated, and those in charge of setting norms usually fail to keep up with these changes.

What is international law? It is an aggregate of international norms. By the way, these are not simply rules that someone has scribbled under a blanket, thinking that everyone has to follow them. If we are discussing international public law, the norms governing interstate relations have to be coordinated and agreed upon: you sign them, assume obligations and honour them. If today’s world order hinges upon sovereignty, this means that if someone does not sign a document, you cannot demand that this state complies with something it did not subscribe to. This is called “trying to impose someone’s will on other countries.” The faster we move away from attempts to introduce such practices into international relations, the better, and this would make the world calmer and more stable.

Fyodor Lukyanov: We have another colleague from the United States – Christian Whiton, Centre for the National Interest.

Christian, you have the floor.

Christian Whiton: Hello, Fyodor. Great. Thank you so much for calling on me, and thank you for Valdai, for organising this important conference.

President Putin, I really appreciate your important comments, which I do not think we have heard from any other world leader, about culture and its importance. One person here in the United States that might be interested and supportive of what you have said is former President Donald Trump. I am not certain about that, but he has spoken of similar things. My question for you is that there is a lot of speculation that former President Trump may again run for office in 2024, and you have spoken about Angela Merkel, for example. What do you think about the idea of a second Donald Trump presidency?

Vladimir Putin: Would you vote for him? (Laughter.)

I am not kidding. Where is the joke? Please help us. Would you vote for Donald Trump as a presidential candidate in the United States of America?

Christian Whiton: I am sorry, I thought you were asking President Putin.

Yes. My view, and I worked in the Trump administration at the State Department, early in his administration. I think it is remarkable. He has redefined conservatism, perhaps, along some of similar lines that President Putin talked about healthy conservatism.

However, in our system, if you begin a second term, you are essentially a lame duck, in that you cannot run again, so people start discounting you. Also I like what Donald Trump does in challenging the vocal minority that has infected our culture, but on the other hand his administration had a lot of inefficiencies, if you will, staff in very senior levels that did not agree with his agenda. Sometimes it seemed like the authority of his presidency did not extend beyond the White House to the rest of the very large US government.

So my preference is that other conservatives step up like Ron DeSantis, the Governor of Florida, step up and run for President. But if it is a choice between Donald Trump and a Democrat, I would vote for Donald Trump, yes.

Vladimir Putin: If you allow me, I would prefer to keep my point of view on this matter to myself and refrain from commenting on what you have just said. Otherwise, you will have to register as a foreign agent. (Laughter.)

However, I do understand your idea.

Thank you very much for your participation.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Anastasia Likhacheva.

Anastasia Likhacheva: Thank you.

Mr President, when speaking about the biggest challenges of our time, you have mentioned water scarcity and food supply issues. In your opinion, what positive contribution could Russia make to addressing them within as well as beyond its borders, considering that Russia ranks second in the world in terms of its renewable freshwater resources, and has its unique Lake Baikal and great traditions in research, on top of being a major food exporter. Thank you.

Vladimir Putin: We are already doing this and will step up our efforts even more. Let me explain what this means and where the concerns about a possible food crisis come from.

As I have already mentioned, both at a recent meeting with members of the Government, and just now, there are system-wide dysfunctions within the global economy. They are attributable to growing deficits and inflation and lead to disrupted supply chains. This is not just about the Suez Canal, and the shortage of lorry drivers in Great Britain for delivering fuel to the pump. There is a general disruption, and COVID-19 did play a role in this, unfortunately.

There are other reasons, however. Where does all this lead? We were discussing rising fuel prices. This, in turn, pushes up electricity prices. If we convert our prices into euros, one megawatt-hour costs 20 euros in Russia, and over 300 euros in European countries. Of course, there is a difference in terms of income levels, but this gap is too big.

Some governments and representatives of international institutions say: “This is the right way to go, keep up the good work.” Just think about this. They are now thinking about paying out subsidies in order to offset this huge hike in energy prices. It could seem appropriate. After all, the state must lend its shoulder to its people. However, this is a one-time fix, and afterwards people will still suffer.

Why? Because the volume of primary fuel stays the same, which means that someone will not get it. People, the households who receive this subsidy will not reduce their consumption, despite all the fear mongering on German television. They will not reduce their consumption as long as they are subsidised. Why cut back? But the supply will remain the same. What does this mean? Someone will have to consume less. Who will that be? Industry. In what sector? The metals industry. This will lead to higher prices on all products containing metal and all the way down the value chain. This is a huge chain, from cars to tiepins.

Second, fertiliser producers that use natural gas are already closing their manufacturing facilities. This is already happening. There are reasons to believe that the soil fertilizer sector will be underfunded. What will this result in? There will be less food on the global market, and people will have to pay higher prices. Once again, it all falls on the people, although it all started with an initiative designed to help them.

It may seem as if it is headed in the right direction, but it is necessary to raise the question of whether it is appropriate to restrict extraction, including in the Arctic. Do we need to restrict new transit routes, including Nord Stream 2, for political reasons? These are the questions to be asked. We need to think about fundamental things.

Considering the growing risks and uncertainty, do we really have to transfer all the supplies to the spot market? Or maybe thinking about long-term investment would make more sense, and using long-term contracts instead, at least in part. This is what we must think about. This is how we can prevent crises from suddenly breaking out.

Russia is making a significant contribution to food security today. We are increasing food supplies to the world market; we are exporting over US$25 billion worth of foodstuffs. I have already said this many times and I would like to thank our agricultural producers once again. This is primarily the result of their efforts. We could never even dream about this. Now we must thank the Europeans for their agricultural sanctions. Well done. Thank you for all your sanctions. We have introduced countermeasures in agriculture and invested appropriate resources.

By the way, we have boosted the so-called import substitution in industry, not only in agriculture. And I must say, the effect has been good. I did have some anxiety, I must admit, but the overall effect has been very good. We have used our brains, resumed some old projects, and started new ones, including in high-tech industries. I hope will continue to increase production in agriculture.

Climate change has also been bringing changes to Russian agriculture. What am I referring to? For example, in Russian black soil regions, the quality of the soil is changing, and things are shifting a little further north. There are also problems caused by natural phenomena and cataclysms – desertification and things like that. But Russia will adapt to this, this is quite obvious, and it will fully meet not only its own needs, but also provide our main partners in the world markets with high-quality and affordable food at world prices.

There is also something else. I just said fertiliser plants are closing, but the quality and quantity of harvests, the volume of crops depend on them. But we supply the necessary amounts of fertilisers to international markets, and we are ready to increase production further. By the way, in this respect, in terms of their impact on human health, our fertilisers are among the best in the world – our companies’ rivals are reluctant to talk about this. But I hope that after I have mentioned this, our media will show what I mean, I just do not want to waste time now.

Well, as for water resources, some say water will soon be more expensive than oil, but we are not yet planning projects to reverse rivers. This must be treated very carefully and with an understanding of the long-term consequences of the decisions we make. But in general, Russia is one of the countries whose water balance will be stable and secure for a long time. Although we must also think about it. We must think about the purity of our rivers, carefully watch what is happening with the water sector in the Far East, at Lake Baikal, and so on.

I will not go into detail now, but we really have enough problems to address. We know about them, we identify new problems. We will continue working according to the plans we have outlined in this regard. When faced with new challenges, we will try to overcome them.

Vladimir Putin: You have just mentioned the possibility of assuming the lead. You know, of course, it seems to me that one should seek to tackle the most important objectives. But it is necessary to proceed from reality. We publicly declared our aim of achieving hydrocarbon neutrality by 2060, and so we are doing this.

Incidentally (I have mentioned this repeatedly and will say so once again), Russia has a greener energy mix than that of many other industrialised countries. In Russia, 86 percent of the energy mix is composed of nuclear power generation that produces almost no emissions, hydropower generation, gas generation, and renewable sources. Eighty-six percent! The US figure is 77 percent. In Germany, if my memory serves me right, it is 64 percent, and even less so in Asian countries. Isn’t that the lead? It certainly is!

We understand, of course, that this is not enough. This is not enough even for us, because here the temperature is rising more rapidly than the global average, while in the North the rise is even faster than on average in the rest of Russia. For us, this is fraught with serious consequences, given that a considerable part of Russia’s territory is in the Far North. We certainly are thinking about this.

A few words about people’s lives.

Starting with the removal of all kinds of landfill sites, which also generate CO2 in large cities and contaminate people’s lives, something that we are working on, and ending with the situation in our large industrial centres, we have a programme for all of this. We may not be advancing as fast as we would like to, but, overall, we are on schedule with our plans.

We would have accomplished this earlier if it were not for the 2008–2009 crisis, which came to us from without, as we are all aware. But our industry simply screamed that many enterprises would keel over if we started to implement the so-called best technologies in that sphere. We had to postpone the implementation of our plans, but now the decisions have been taken at the legislative level and are being implemented.

We are giving priority attention in our programme to 12 cities that are the largest emission producers, after which we will turn our attention to all the other emission producers and all industries. This is one of the priorities of our national projects and national plans.

As for carbon neutrality in general, it should be remembered that 45 percent of carbon emissions are being absorbed, if my memory serves me well. Incidentally, in this connection we will insist that our absorption ability is taken into account, that is, the absorption ability of our forests, our seas and the territories connected with the ocean. It is an objective fact, and it should be taken into account.

Moreover, in this context we have major reserves regarding the implementation of plans, for example, in the area of housing and utilities and energy efficiency. This is definitely what we can and should work on.

In other words, what we need is not a mechanical, mindless implementation of measures formulated by others, but a result. We intend to work towards this result absolutely transparently and honestly. However, I would not like our efforts to protect nature and implement climate policy recommendations to become a covert instrument of rivalry on the global markets. This would be very bad. This would undermine trust in what we are doing for the future of humankind.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Mr President, do we have a programme of our own regarding our actions in the event the EU introduces a carbon tax and Russian producers have to pay it?

Vladimir Putin: So far, no fundamental decisions have been taken that would undermine our interests or that would be non-transparent or absolutely unfair. I have talked with some of the [Western] leaders – I will not name them now – who are aware that the requirements that are being formulated at the level of European institutions are not transparent and cannot be described as fair. All of this certainly calls for more work. We hope that this will be done through dialogue with other countries, including Russia.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Angela Stent, our veteran and scientific council member, is with us from Washington.

Angela, please, go ahead with your question.

Angela Stent: Thank you very much, Fyodor, and I am sorry I am only here virtually.

Mr President, I heard you talk about some ways in which the US and Russia are working together, and I want to ask you another question about Afghanistan.

Twenty years ago Russia and the United States cooperated to defeat al-Qaeda and to remove the Taliban from power. Twenty years later, now in the aftermath of the American withdrawal, do you believe that counterterrorist cooperation between Russia and the United States is desirable? Is it possible? Do you think we would still share some of the same goals vis-à-vis Afghanistan that we did twenty years ago?

Vladimir Putin: I think that cooperation between Russia and the United States on counter-terrorism is not only possible, but is a necessity. We have discussed this many times, including with you. It is too bad you cannot be in this room with us today.

It is obvious that this is a common threat. Unfortunately, it has not become less of a danger than it was 20 years ago. Moreover, this threat has been growing bigger and took on a global dimension on our watch. We can only be effective in countering it by working together.

I have already said that our countries’ special services maintain contact, although in my opinion they could have established an even closer relationship, but we are grateful to our American partners for the information that has enabled us to prevent terrorist attacks in the Russian Federation.

I can assure you that we will do everything we can to relay any necessary information to our American colleagues in a timely manner if it is relevant to them and if we have the information at our disposal. I would like to emphasise once again that everyone stands to benefit from this cooperation.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Mr President, on Afghanistan. The Taliban is de facto in control there. They came to Moscow, and in general communicate with everyone. How long will Russia view them as a terrorist organisation with everyone having to say it is a terrorist organisation every time it is mentioned?

Vladimir Putin: This is not about us, Russia. You can see that we work with the Taliban and invited them to Moscow, and we have been maintaining contact with them in Afghanistan.

In fact, these decisions were taken at the UN level. It is clear that the Taliban are currently in control in Afghanistan, and we expect them to bring about positive momentum. Depending on how it goes, we will come together to decide whether it can be excluded from the list of terrorist organisations. I believe that we are getting there. Russia’s position will be to move precisely in this direction.

However, we need to take decisions like this the same way they were adopted before, when we decided to designate this movement as a terrorist organisation.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Asia is clearly underrepresented.

We have Professor Shimotomai joining us. Please go ahead.

Nobuo Shimotomai: Thank you.

Mr President, I am honoured, although I was unable to come to Sochi this time.

I found your report very interesting, including your point that state borders have become an anachronism. Indeed, perhaps the most acute antagonism exists in Northeast Asia over state borders and the like. Prime Minister Abe and you made an attempt to fill this gap in search of a new peace treaty. However, over the past two years the prime minister of Japan has changed twice without meeting with you. How do you see future bilateral relations, primarily, the prospects for a peace treaty between Russia and Japan? Thank you.

Vladimir Putin: Yes, indeed, political life in Japan is structured in a way where the political scene changes quite quickly, but the interests of the Japanese and Russian people remain unchanged and are based on the desire to reach a final settlement in our relations, including the conclusion of a peace treaty. We will strive to make this happen despite the changes in figures on Japan’s political stage.

Most recently, as you are aware, on October 7, I spoke with the new Prime Minister of Japan by telephone. He is undoubtedly an experienced person and is up to date on our relations since he was engaged in international affairs. He is fairly close in a political sense to former Prime Minister Abe. So in this sense, of course, I think we will see continuity in Japan’s position regarding its relations with Russia.

Under Mr Abe, we aligned a series of joint actions and joint work to bring Russian-Japanese relations to a new level. I would very much like this work to continue in the same vein going forward.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Friends, the President has been taking our questions, just questions, for two and a half hours now. I have a suggestion to optimise our work. We will have a quick Q&A session now. Please, ask short questions, do not make statements like Ms Dergham just did, but ask short questions. The President will give quick answers like a machine-gun burst. Yes?

Vladimir Putin: I will do my best.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Ryan Chilcote, go ahead please.

Ryan Chilcote: Thank you, Fyodor.

But please, do not give me a machine-gun burst in response.

Fyodor Lukyanov: It depends on your question.

Vladimir Putin: We have it, too. (Laughter.)

Ryan Chilcote: I understand.

My question is about the pandemic. The biggest foreign agent and the greatest external threat is the continuing pandemic. The only difference between Russia and many countries is the low vaccination rate. What do you think about mandatory vaccination as a solution to the problem?

Vladimir Putin: I have already said that vaccination will become mandatory when it is listed in the National Immunisation Calendar. Vaccination against the coronavirus infection is not listed there, and in this sense, it is not mandatory. But under current legislation, the regional authorities have the right to introduce mandatory vaccination for certain categories of people in conditions of a growing epidemic on the recommendation of chief sanitary doctors. This is what is happening in our country.

But a requirement is not the point. I personally do not support it. Why? Because it is possible to get around any decision imposed from above. People will buy certificates.

Maybe it is the other way around with those who get some Western vaccine. I have heard many times how it goes: citizens from European countries come here and get a Sputnik jab and then buy a certificate that they got Pfizer. I am serious. This is what doctors from European countries say. They believe that Sputnik is more reliable and safer.

But this is not the point. I am saying this not to promote Sputnik. I am saying that it is relatively easy to get around any imposed solution. It is a well-known observation that hundreds or thousands work on the laws and millions think about getting around them. As a rule, they succeed. Therefore, it seems to me, it is necessary to convince people rather than impose something on them. We need to convince them, to prove that vaccination is a better choice. I talked about this just recently.

This applies not only to Russia but also to other countries. There are only two scenarios for almost every person: either get sick or get the vaccine. It is not possible to slip through raindrops. It is necessary to enhance the confidence of people in the actions of the authorities. It is necessary to be more convincing and to prove a point through example. I hope we will learn to do this.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Mr Sajjadpour, go ahead please.

Seyed Kazem Sajjadpour: Thank you, Mr President. My question relates to Afghanistan. How do you see the American defeat and withdrawal from Afghanistan in a broader strategic sense? Would it change the US global positioning, and what would impact on the alignment of forces that you talked about? Thank you.

Vladimir Putin: First, I would like to say that the President of the United States did the right thing by withdrawing troops from Afghanistan. Probably, he did not know the details of how this would proceed but he understood that this would be a line of attack on the domestic political scene. But he still made this decision and assumed this responsibility.

Of course, we see how this happened and probably it could have been done differently. Naturally, this will primarily affect the attitude towards the US of those countries that consider the US their ally. But I think that with time everything will fall into place and there will be no cardinal changes.

Yes, this will affect relations with allies in the near future but the appeal of a country still depends not on this but on its economic and military might.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Alexander Rahr, go ahead please.

Alexander Rohr: Mr President, when you and Gerhard Schroeder met at the first session of the Petersburg Dialogue, you said relations between Germany and Russia were the best in a hundred years.

Unfortunately, they have deteriorated a lot now. My question is: Will it be possible to resuscitate at least the Petersburg Dialogue with the new German Chancellor, in all probability, this will be Olaf Scholz.

Thank you.

Vladimir Putin: You know, Alexander, this does not depend solely on us. If the Germans display interest in this issue, we will step up our efforts in this area. That said, the Petersburg dialogue still exists, it has not disappeared and it continues in principle. Of course, it is possible to make bilateral contacts more intensive and productive. I understand this but it is necessary to depoliticise these contacts. I hope this will be done.

The coalition in Germany seems to be complicated and its various political forces are likely to have different views. Let’s see what it leads to in practice. I don’t know. But we are for it, we are ready for this.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Anatol Lieven, go ahead please.

Anatol Lieven: Thank you, Mr President, for coming. Anatol Lieven from the Quincy Institute for Responsible Statecraft.

China and other countries have made a move to electric cars, a key part of their action against climate change. What are Russia’s plans in this regard? Thank you.

Vladimir Putin: I have spoken about this many times. Of course, when cars move in cities they are one of the biggest air pollutants like housing and utilities and industry. This is obvious. But on a global scale we should not forget where electricity comes from.

Let us be straight with each other. Electric vehicles are a good thing but pollution of the environment during electricity generation is not so good. Meanwhile, the coal generation in European countries, such as Germany, since Alexander just asked about this, is twice as much as in Russia. It is double there. I think it amounts to 32 percent, and here is it 15–16 percent.

But in principle this is good. In Russia, such global reserves of natural gas could make gas engine fuel an alternative. It is necessary to change the energy balance in favour of the green agenda and in this case, we will achieve the desired result.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Mr President, have you driven an electric car?

Vladimir Putin: Yes, I have, in Ogaryovo.

Fyodor Lukyanov: How is it? Is there a difference?

Vladimir Putin: I drive these cars in Ogaryovo, this is true, but I don’t feel much difference. They are good cars.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Konstantin Zatulin.

Konstantin Zatulin: Mr President, I am Konstantin Zatulin, a member of the State Duma from the city where we are meeting [Sochi]. But my question is not about this.

Vladimir Putin: But mentioning this is not out of place.

Konstantin Zatulin: Yes, certainly.

My question is about history and memory. At the beginning of this meeting much was said about “Homo Sovieticus,” post-Soviet countries and post-Soviet space today. I would like to note that on November 2 we will mark 300 years of the Russian Empire.

This year we celebrated the 800th anniversary of Prince Alexander Nevsky, and you personally unveiled a monument, which made a great impression on many people. But for some reason nothing is being said about the 300th anniversary of the Russian Empire. Is it because we are embarrassed to use the word “empire”? If so, this is a bad idea. This was a major period in our history, the continuous existence of our state, from the Russian Empire to the Soviet Union and on to the Russian Federation, even though they might reject each other in some ways.

I would like to hope – we have addressed you on this occasion – that you will receive our letter and will consider the possibility of taking a more active part in this event, even if we miss the exact date, November 2, at least we will remember it.

Vladimir Putin: I agree with you. The continuity of history is important for knowing where we are moving. I fully agree with you. If we have missed something here, please accept my apologies. The next event will be connected with your name. (Laughter.)

Fyodor Lukyanov: Yury Slezkin.

Yury Slezkin: My question concerns history as well. You have been the head of the Russian state for many years, and you certainly think a great deal about your role in Russian history. What do you regard as your main achievements and largest failures as head of state?

Vladimir Putin: You know, I never think about my role in history. As soon as you start thinking about this, you need to step down because these thoughts stand in the way of decision-making. I am speaking absolutely honestly now. As soon as you think: “What if this or that happens, and what would Princess Maria Alekseyevna say?” – the game is over, and you better step down.

As for what I have accomplished, we had 40 million people living below the poverty line. Today there are too many as well, over 19 million, or even 20 million, according to various estimates. This is too many, but not as many as 40 million. This is probably my main achievement.

Our economy has recovered. Some industries, including the defence sector, were as good as dead. If we had lost more time, we would have been unable to restore them; the production links and our scientific schools would have been lost forever. We have restored them, not to mention the fact that the statutes and constitutions of the constituent members of the Russian Federation included all manner of provisions, including the right to mint money, they even had their own state borders, but they did not mention the fact that they were constituent members of the Russian Federation. It was a very serious challenge. We have dealt with that.

Or take the fight against international terrorism. You know, I will tell you what I sometimes think, and will be honest with you. Yes, we did overcome that difficult period in the life of our country, especially when it comes to terrorism. This was by far not only my personal contribution that we did it, but thanks to the patience, courage and will of the Russian people. I am not saying this for effect but absolutely sincerely, because I saw the difficulties and suffering Russian families faced. But Russia was equal to the task, which means that this passionarity we mentioned at the beginning, has a big role to play in the Russia nation. We definitely have the internal impetus for development and it is very powerful.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Mr President, since you don’t want to talk about your role in history, I would like to try another track.

There is a popular trend to discuss the vision of the future, everyone is looking for a vision of the future. The Valdai Club is also looking for it as are many others. Mr Andrei Bezrukov is sitting here in the front row; he also does a lot in this regard.

Personally, I am afraid we will not find a vision now, because the world is incredibly uncertain. But I might be wrong.

Do you have any vision of Russia’s future, or the world’s, something you would like to see or that you would like your descendants to see?

Vladimir Putin: You know, one can talk a lot about this, and I have already answered this question more than once, one way or another, in different forms, and I do not want to repeat my old phrases.

I would start with the theme of today's Valdai meeting. What is it?

Fyodor Lukyanov: The Return of the Future.

Vladimir Putin: No, no. The slogan of today's meeting?

Fyodor Lukyanov: Global Shake-Up.

Vladimir Putin: It’s longer.

Fyodor Lukyanov: The Individual, Values. But “individual” is rarely remembered.

Vladimir Putin: Well, it should be, because this is the most important point.

I have been remembering [Nikolai] Berdyaev. As you know, he wrote several major works, and they are still popular. He wrote about the new Middle Ages, as was relevant at that time, about freedom, how it was such a heavy burden. But he also said something else – that the individual should always be at the centre of development. The individual is more important than society or the state. I would very much like to see a future where all the resources of society and the state are concentrated around the interests of the individual. We definitely need to strive for this. It is difficult to say now how effective we will be in creating such a system, but this is what we should strive for.

A young man over there has raised his hand. Go ahead, please.

Dmitry Suslov: Thank you very much, Mr President.

Dmitry Suslov, Higher School of Economics.

You noted in your remarks today that disagreements around the world – both intranational and international – have reached a level where world wars used to break out in previous eras. So far, we have not seen a world war, at least not a ‘hot’ one.

Vladimir Putin: Do you miss this?

Dmitry Suslov: I just wanted to ask if this means – we probably have not seen a world war because the world has nuclear weapons – but does this mean it cannot happen at all? And if it cannot happen, it’s like Dostoevsky wrote: if there is no God, anything is permitted. I mean, if there is no threat of a world war, it can lead to complete irresponsibility: you can do whatever you want because there will be no world war, there are no obstacles for pursuing an aggressive policy – and so on.

But, if there is a threat of a world war, if the danger of a world war is still out there, shouldn’t Russia, as a nuclear superpower, as a country that has gone through the hardest wars – you also mentioned this today – a country that knows the value of peace, and peace is probably also a universal value, shouldn't Russia declare a little more strongly that the protection of peace, strengthening peace is the goal of Russia’s foreign policy, and some practical steps should be taken here too?

Thank you.

Vladimir Putin: We say a lot of positive and important things, but our partners simply prefer not to notice many of them.

So more talk would be pointless; we must act to achieve what we are talking about. This is not an easy job, not an easy task, but we will definitely work at it.

You spoke about nuclear weapons. It is a huge responsibility that nuclear powers have. You also said a third world war may be improbable in the modern situation; but there is still a threat of mutual destruction, let’s not forget about that.

The central sector now, please.

Tatiana Kastoueva-Jean: Thank you very much.

Tatiana Kastoueva-Jean, French Institute of International Relations.

I have a question that may seem unexpected but it is very important for France. Newspapers have been asking questions these past days about the presence of Russian mercenaries in Mali. To keep it short, this is my question: can the interests of a private military company that operates outside Russian law be at odds with Russia’s state interests? Thank you.

Vladimir Putin: We have discussed this with our French colleagues on numerous occasions, including with President Macron who raised this subject with me.

You said that these are private companies, not the state. They do not represent the interests of the Russian state. If they are operating somewhere without instructions from the Russian state, this is a private business, private initiatives related, among other things, to fuel production and other resources, gold, or gems, what have you. However, if this contradicts the interests of the Russian state, which can happen, we will unfortunately have to respond, and we will definitely do something about it.

Mehdi Sanaei: Mr President,

First, thank you for this opportunity to have this conversation.

I have a question about South Caucasus. There was a ceasefire and some agreements were reached, but so far, there has been no final solution, and you know that some countries, republics in the regions, have reasons to question whether this will happen.

The three-plus-three format emerged, including with Russia’s support. However, it has yet to become operational. Iran, Azerbaijan and Russia had a platform for working on the North-South corridor. Iran, Russia and Turkey had a trilateral platform for fighting terrorism. By the way, it is unfortunate that South Caucasus has also been affected by terrorism.

Of course, Russia plays a very important role here. Other formats with the participation of Armenia and other countries are also possible.

Do we need to fast-track initiatives in order to create a format of this kind? What do you think? What format, in your opinion, would offer the most effective solution, taking into consideration the interests of the South-Caucasian republics and countries in the region?

Thank you.

Vladimir Putin: First, I would like to praise the President of Azerbaijan and the Prime Minister of Armenia for their political wisdom. After all, despite all the tragedy with the ongoing developments, they were able to rise above the political fray and make some very responsible decisions.

I do know that they have been facing criticism inside their own countries, as strange as this may seem. There are always political forces that are unhappy and believe that things could have been better. “Go ahead and do a better job” – this is what always springs to mind. After all, President Aliyev and Prime Minister Pashinyan succeeded in stopping the bloodshed.

However, there is more to it, although there is nothing more important than saving human lives. Nonetheless, there are other critical aspects to it, namely: it is vital to create proper conditions for a long-term settlement in the region. These conditions can be created only if both sides accept the existing arrangements as long-term and appreciate the advantages, I want to emphasise this, offered by peaceful coexistence, and everyone is interested in this.

Azerbaijan is interested in normal transport links with Nakhichevan. It is interested in deblocking connection lines. One of the first tasks facing Armenia is to create an effective economic life and effective interaction in the region going forward, including with Azerbaijan. Armenia is basically interested in this. Interested in unfreezing its relations with Turkey and giving them a modern dimension.

In either case, it should lead us to achieving our main goal which is to create a safe environment for the coexistence of the two states and for economic growth. Is it possible to accomplish this or not? It may well be. We did our best to stop the bloodshed, and not only this. Our peacekeepers are performing their duty in a dignified manner, and over 50,000 refugees have returned home.

Overall, the situation in the conflict zone remains as it is with no major hostilities. Unfortunately, some incidents do happen, and unfortunately, people die sometimes. Maybe it is difficult to conjure up a completely idealistic picture after so many years of confrontation. The most important thing to do now is to finally settle the situation at the border. Of course, not much can be accomplished without Russia's participation. Perhaps, we do not need anyone else but the two sides and Russia. Why? There are simple and pragmatic things, such as the maps that show where the border between the Soviet republics was in the Soviet period, which are kept by the General Staff of the Russian army.

Based on these documents, both sides should sit down and talk. There are things that require compromises on both sides: some things need to be straightened out and some exchanges could be made but both sides must recognise that a deal is beneficial for both sides. Can this be done or not? It can. But, of course, we are also in favour of establishing a multilateral format, such as, say, step up the Minsk Group’s activities. We are working on this, including with our partners.

Most importantly, we should achieve our main goal which is to ensure security and to build relations in a positive manner. So far, we have been able to achieve our goals. Of course, we need to look to the future and see what will happen next. It is not about a declaration on a possible extension of the Russian contingent’s stay; it is not about that. The point is to properly align relations between these two countries. This is what matters. I hope we will be able to get it done.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Igor Istomin. He has been holding his hand up for a long time.

Vladimir Putin: We must wrap up, it is already after 9 o’clock.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Yes, we are wrapping up.

Igor Istomin: Good evening, Mr President. Igor Istomin, MGIMO [Moscow State Institute of International Relations].

In your speech – I hope I am quoting you correctly – you said that the reforming or cancellation of some international organisations may be on the agenda. In this context, I would like to ask you about the prospects for the Council of Europe and the OSCE, as well as prospects for Russia’s participation in them. Thank you.

Vladimir Putin: In general, if these organisations work for implementing the goals that they were established for in a broad sense, there are prospects for their existence. The Council of Europe is primarily a European question. The same largely applies to the OSCE. But if they work exclusively with the post-Soviet space, trying to lecture the newly-formed independent states that appeared in the post-Soviet space, their prospects are limited. I can assure you that if Russia were to withdraw from one of these organisations it would be interesting to see what would happen with them as regards the participation of other countries.

Nobody needs moral preaching. So, we need to take a broader look at humanitarian issues and cooperation with the Council of Europe, or security issues in Europe in the broad sense of this word.

But let’s finish our session. There’s a colleague with his hand up in the centre.

Muhammad Athar Javed: Thank you very much. Dr Athar Javed from Pakistan House, Islamabad.

Actually, with all due respect, of course, the counterterrorism campaign is very important internationally, and it will continue. My question to you, Mr President, is about the ongoing negotiations in Pakistan, Iran, Russia and China. And, of course, Pakistan facilitated this Doha process as well. In the wake of NATO failing completely on almost every adventure – or misadventure – they made, including Afghanistan, of course, the mess is their responsibility. But if the Taliban manages to prevent drug trade, secures its territory against ISIS and terminates all the infrastructure, what will be the reaction or the response from Russia, China and Pakistan?

Of course, it is not about recognition only. It is, as you said very rightfully, important to empower the Taliban on the ground economically, so the continuity should award social areas, like doctors, salaries, nurses, education, teachers or anything else related to social factors.

I think I would really appreciate if you could, say, shed light on this one, on how important it is to again wrap the mess of NATO. But it is important for the region, that is why I think Russia and China should take the lead on this account as well. Thank you very much for this opportunity.

Vladimir Putin: As for the mess created by NATO, I do not think we should comment on this because everyone has already expressed his opinion on what the United States and President Biden have done. I have already said what I think about this. I think he did the right thing by deciding to withdraw the troops. But, of course, now we should look to the future. But because they were the one to create this mess, as you said, they shouldn’t shed the responsibility for what is going on there and for the future. And they have plenty of instruments, primarily financial ones, for exerting influence on the situation in Afghanistan. Europe has them, too. One shouldn’t look down at this territory, as our colleagues in the Council of Europe often do. They are also responsible for what happened there. So everyone should join in helping the Afghan people.

However, we must still avoid repeating the mistakes of the past. Nobody should impose on the Afghan people what the Soviet Union or the United States tried to inflict on them. Incidentally, the Soviet Union was even more prudent there and this is why the word “shuravi” as the Soviets were called, does not have a negative connotation. The region’s countries are even more interested in normalisation, and Russia will do all it can to achieve it.

We see the Taliban trying to fight the extreme radicals and organisations such as ISIS, which leave no doubt as to their terrorist intentions. Yes, they were their fellow travellers, we understand that – after all, we are proceeding from reality – momentary fellow travellers. Now they are attacking the Taliban.

But the thing is the Taliban needs to establish relations with all ethnic and religious groups, with all political and public organisations inside Afghanistan.

Let’s start with the ethnic component. Yes, the Taliban is mostly made up of Pushtun groups. But there are also the Tajiks – from 40 to 47 percent, according to various estimates. This is a lot, isn’t it? There are Uzbeks, the Hazara, and so on. If we look at this component, then right, I know of course that these groups have their representatives at the ruling level, in the government, but they are not playing the leading roles, and these people do aspire to take important positions in the national governance system. This balance must be found.

We are not pushing them, we are just saying how this is seen, in principle, from the outside. We are doing our best to influence them to have regard for the appetites of the people we are in contact with – and we are in contact, by the way, with all political forces in Afghanistan, and we are establishing sufficiently stable relations with everyone. But we would like acceptable compromises to be found so that the problems confronting the country are not being resolved with weapons alone, as it has been. Women’s interests should be taken into consideration as well.

After all, Afghanistan is aspiring to be a modern state. And it seems to me that Pakistan plays a no less important part in this than Russia or China. This is why we are interested in promoting cooperation, including with your country, to achieve a common, desirable result.

There is no doubt that Russia is interested in Afghanistan at long last emerging from the unending, permanent civil war. The people of that long-suffering – without exaggeration – country must feel safe within their national borders and have a chance for development and prosperity. We will seek in every way to attain this goal.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Mr President, thank you for the conversation. I will relieve you of your duties as a moderator, because it is time.

Vladimir Putin: I am not claiming your salary.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Well, just in case, pre-emptively.

I think we had an exceedingly interesting session because we covered practically all matters. Thank you very much.

In the course of this session, I was thinking that we should probably stay away from New York for a while. Next year, the Valdai Club will probably meet in Sochi again. We very much hope that everything will be good, and we will see you like this, in person, and talk – only our conversation will last about five hours then. Thank you.

Vladimir Putin: Thank you very much.

There is no need to hold the closing session in New York; I am saying this without irony. It is fun to visit New York, and some platforms there… It is good to visit Afghanistan, and it makes sense to do that. Other places, like Europe, as well, and to discuss issues that concern Europe most of all such as energy and climate. Why not? I know forums are being held one way or another.

Fyodor Lukyanov: We are holding them in many places.

Vladimir Putin: Yes. New York is an option, too.

Fyodor Lukyanov: Thank you.

Vladimir Putin: Are you laughing? Do you think this is impossible? (Laughter.)

Colleagues, I want to thank you. Indeed, you have been coming to Russia for many years now and continue to show interest in our country. This gives my colleagues and me an opportunity – I am not the only one at this forum, our ministers attend as well, such as the Foreign Minister and the mayors, and the Mayor of Moscow spoke recently – to share our vision of Russia in the modern world and where we are headed. In my opinion, this has a positive practical outcome.

Our colleagues travel abroad occasionally. A Deputy Prime Minister returned from the United States recently and had the following to say: “I was surprised to find out during my conversations with top officials from the US administration or a national security adviser that there is a lack of information.” That is strange. Maybe they do not have enough trust in the CIA, I am not sure. But, in fact, such forums are much sought after, since they provide an opportunity to have a candid conversation, to have a sense of each other and to give the people who make decisions at different levels of power an opportunity to be aware of what is being discussed, including at the Valdai Club.

Thank you very much.



////



Expanded meeting of the Foreign Ministry Board
Event_Date: 18/10/2021
Event_Time: 16:50
Event_Place: Moscow

Mr Lavrov, colleagues,

I would like to welcome everyone here to the expanded meeting of the Foreign Ministry Board. Today, our agenda is focused on the implementation of Russia’s foreign policy and priority tasks for the future, taking into account the adopted amendments to the Constitution, which also concern foreign policy.

Importantly, our Fundamental Law has now sealed such basic ideas and values as loyalty to the homeland, respect for our native tongue, history, culture and traditions of our predecessors. This is everything that unites our people around common ideals and determines the vector for the development of the sovereign, independent and peace-loving Russian state, an active member of the international community.

We will also fix the specific areas of foreign policy, of our diplomatic work in today’s difficult international conditions in the new version of the Foreign Policy Concept that is now being drafted. This document, along with the National Security Strategy endorsed this summer, will, actually, become a roadmap for the Foreign Ministry and other ministries and departments.

The main thing is that our foreign policy should continue ensuring the most comfortable and secure conditions for Russia’s development, resolving ambitious socioeconomic tasks and improving the living standards of our people.

With this in mind, Russia is committed to developing partnership and mutually beneficial constructive relations with all countries and regional associations. We will proactively participate in international efforts to counter common challenges and threats which, unfortunately, still include terrorism and cross-border crime, proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, poverty, inequality, climate change and environmental degradation.

As a permanent member of the UN Security Council, Russia is set to continue to firmly uphold the fundamental principles enshrined in the UN Charter such as sovereignty and equality of states, non-interference in their internal affairs, fair settlement of disputes and of course, the key role of the UN in addressing international problems.

Our proposal to hold a summit of states – permanent members of the UN Security Council, which bear special responsibility for maintaining international peace and stability, is in line with this principled approach.
Colleagues,

The coronavirus pandemic – we will have to talk about this as well, since there is no way around it given the circumstances – has seriously disrupted the usual course of life around the world. Last year – and the [Foreign] Minister just mentioned this – we were unable to even get together for our traditional meeting at the Foreign Ministry with the ambassadors and Russia’s permanent representatives. In fact, we began to work in a new environment.

But here is what I would like to emphasise. I have spoken about this more than once. Despite the ongoing measures, the pandemic is far from being overcome, and the risks of more waves of the disease coming our way are quite likely, and not a single country will be able to isolate itself from them. So, Russia calls for establishing actual cooperation in fighting this insidious disease on an equal and fair basis. Achieving success and defeating the virus is impossible without this.

Recently at the G20 summit, I proposed expediting the mutual recognition of national vaccine certificates and urged our partners to act promptly – you have probably seen this. It is of the essence for reviving global business and tourism activity and, in general, bringing life back to normal.

Of course, in this context, the role of the World Health Organisation (WHO) is increasing. Its work should be supported in every way. It could be even more active in mass immunisation, and in particular, could speed up the prequalification of new vaccines and medications, that is, the process for assessing their quality, safety and efficacy.

Another growing challenge is climate change. Russia is addressing it, proposing out-of-the-box initiatives. Clean nuclear energy and hydropower, gas power generation, as well as the enormous absorptive capacity of our forests and ecosystems have made our country one of the leaders in the global decarbonisation process. We meet all our commitments under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Paris Agreement.

Recently, a major decision was taken to implement a new programme to improve energy efficiency in the economy by 2035, and this is only the first stage. The programme will be part of a broader plan to achieve carbon neutrality by 2060 at the latest. This does not mean it cannot be achieved earlier – I said, not later.

Our diplomacy should be more active in countering attempts by the European Union and the United States to assume the right to dictate the climate agenda single-handedly and to create standards for it, although we saw how difficult discussions in Glasgow were and how many questions they had between themselves. But we are not calling for dissent; on the contrary, we are calling for a search for mutually acceptable solutions. Incidentally, overall we should proceed from the premise that Russia has taken an advanced position in the green transformation and in digitisation in all economic industries and areas of life.

Regarding other priorities for the diplomatic service, I would like to mention the need to pay more attention to strengthening ties with our compatriots abroad, protecting their interests and preserving pan-Russian cultural identity, as well as to simplifying the procedures for granting Russian citizenship to them. Yes, I realise that this problem is at the junction of several ministries and departments, but the Foreign Ministry should also deal with this. In general, we should map out the best ways for using the creative potential of the millions of Russians around the world.

Obviously, it is necessary to continue creating an atmosphere of friendship, security and cooperation in the post-Soviet space. To achieve this, we need to expand our relations with our partners in the Commonwealth of Independent States, with whom we are bonded by historical, cultural and simply human ties.

The Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU) is a key integration association. The EAEU goal is to create a common market for goods and services, capital and workforce. Consistent promotion of integration is already producing results for the participating states, driving their economic growth and helping improve the wellbeing of their citizens. We should use such achievements to involve new members and partners in the orbit of this organisation.

Considering the risks and challenges arising along the perimeter of our borders, we should pay special attention to joint efforts with our allies in the Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO). In the last few decades, the CSTO has seriously contributed to the maintenance of stability in Eurasia. We should steadily promote our cooperation in the CSTO and use it in practice for the reliable protection of the national interests, sovereignty and independence of its members.

We should also enhance, through practical actions, our partnership in the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO). This is one of the most influential centres in the multi-polar world, multi-polar international architecture. It is substantially facilitating stability and a sustainable socioeconomic growth in Eurasia. It is in our interests to achieve closer foreign policy coordination between its members, primarily in the UN, and other international venues.

Of course, we will develop cooperation in BRICS in the same vein. BRICS brings over 40 percent of the world’s population together and occupies more than a quarter of the Earth’s land area. BRICS should play a bigger role in international affairs and match the growing potential of its participants.
Colleagues,

Traditionally, our diplomacy is actively involved in settling regional conflicts. Unfortunately, the number of these conflicts and crisis situations around the world is multiplying, requiring more attention and swift response.

Of course, Ukraine’s internal crisis is among the most pressing and sensitive issues for us, which has so far remained unresolved. Demonstratively, Ukraine has failed to fulfil its obligations under the Minsk Package of Measures, as well as the Normandy format agreements. In other words, our Normandy Quartet partners – Germany and France – do not dispute the importance of the Minsk agreements. By the way, we must not forget that the Minsk agreements have become a norm of international law since the UN Security Council adopted the relevant resolutions. Unfortunately, in reality, [Germany and France] are indulging the current Kiev leadership’s course on dismantling the [Minsk agreements], which, unfortunately, has led the talks and the settlement itself into a dead end.

Nonetheless, it is important to energetically continue the mediation efforts in the Contact Group and the Normandy format, since there are no other international mechanisms to promote an internal Ukrainian settlement, and there is no alternative to implementing the Minsk agreements in full.

Importantly, our Western partners are exacerbating the situation by supplying Kiev with modern lethal weapons, conducting provocative military exercises in the Black Sea and other regions close to our borders. With regard to the Black Sea, this even goes beyond certain limits since strategic bombers, which carry very serious weapons, fly at a distance of only 20 kilometres from our state border.

Indeed, we constantly express our concerns about these matters and talk about red lines, but of course, we understand that our partners are peculiar in the sense that they have a very – how to put it mildly – superficial approach to our warnings about red lines. We remember well NATO's eastward expansion – the audience here is quite representative and professional. Despite the fact that relations between Russia and our Western partners, including the United States, were nothing short of unique, and the level of relations was almost allied, our concerns and warnings regarding NATO's eastward expansion have been totally ignored.

There have been several waves of expansion, and let’s look at where the military infrastructure of the NATO bloc is now – anti-missile defence systems have been deployed right next to our borders in Romania and Poland. These can easily be put to offensive use with the Mk-41 launchers there; replacing the software takes only minutes. Nevertheless, our recent warnings have had a certain effect: tensions have arisen there anyway.

In this regard, I have two points to make. First, it is important for them to remain in this state for as long as possible, so that it does not occur to them to stage some kind of conflict on our western borders which we do not need, we do not need a new conflict.

Second, Mr Lavrov, it is imperative to push for serious long-term guarantees that ensure Russia’s security in this area, because Russia cannot constantly be thinking about what could happen there tomorrow.

Clearly, and I can see this despite the fact that many people are wearing face masks, but I can tell by their eyes that there are sceptical smiles with regard to whether we can count on and hope for serious agreements in this area, keeping in mind that, after all, we are dealing with, to put it mildly, not very reliable partners who can easily backtrack on any previous agreement. Nevertheless, as difficult as it may be, we need to work on this, and I want you to keep that in mind.

It is also impossible to ignore that Western countries are using the migration crisis on Belarus-Poland border as a new reason for tension in a region close to us, for putting pressure on Minsk, while at the same time forgetting their own humanitarian commitments. Just look how the Polish security forces are behaving at the border – you can watch it on the internet or on television. The first thing that comes to mind is those poor children, there are small children there. And they are shooting water and tear gas at the crowd, throwing grenades. At night, helicopters fly along the border, sirens are howling.

I remember well how in 2014, when the Polish government, trying to stop the use of similar equipment by law enforcement forces in Ukraine – [Viktor] Yanukovych was President then – how they said it was unacceptable to use such means against the civilian population. What are they doing now?

Indeed, we know and understand that Belarus has its problems, although domestic political tensions have calmed down, but the problems exist, and yes, we are well aware of this and we certainly support a dialogue between the authorities and the opposition. But Russia, for its part, will undoubtedly continue its policy of strengthening ties and deepening integration with Belarus. We are determined to implement all 28 recently adopted Union State industry programmes to develop a common economic space, and go on to pursue coordinated macroeconomic, tax, banking and credit policies.

A year ago, Russia’s vigorous mediation efforts helped curb the conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh, but the recent shootings on the Armenian-Azerbaijani border have shown that the region has not yet fully stabilised. The efforts of the Russian peacekeeping contingent, as a guarantor of the ceasefire and the civilian population’s security, are essential to ensure stability.

Undoubtedly, Russian diplomacy is playing a growing role in further efforts to settle disputes between Azerbaijan and Armenia, restore economic ties and unblock vital transport corridors in the South Caucasus. We have established an interstate commission at the level of deputy prime ministers. It is working, and I think it has good prospects. All countries of the region, including Russia, are interested in the long-term resolution of these problems.

There are serious challenges with respect to Afghanistan, especially after the US withdrawal from that country. In further contacts with the Taliban, it is necessary to make more active use of the formats of the Moscow consultations and the consultations of the extended “Troika” with the participation of external players and neighbours of Afghanistan with a view to promoting civil peace and public order, neutralising terrorist structures and drug crime.

Developments in Afghanistan dictate the need for additional measures to ensure Russia’s security on its southern borders and provide assistance to our allies – Central Asian states that consider Russia to be a guarantor of regional stability. It is necessary to continue acting in this vein, taking measures to prevent uncontrollable refugee flows and stop terrorists and other criminals from crossing our border.
Colleagues,

We have repeatedly noted the centre of gravity of the world’s politics and economy steadily shift from the Euro-Atlantic to the Asia-Pacific. So, we should continue vigorously developing relations with the states of the Asia-Pacific Region, being guided by our ambitious initiative to create the Greater Eurasian Partnership as a common, broad and open space of security, mutually beneficial economic and humanitarian cooperation.

We will continue strengthening ties with our good neighbours and friends in the People’s Republic of China. Our bilateral ties have now reached the highest level in history and amount to a comprehensive strategic partnership. It is possible to say that they are a model for effective interstate cooperation in the 21st century.

Naturally, this is not to the liking of everyone. Some of our Western partners are openly trying to drive a wedge between Moscow and Beijing. We are well aware of this. Together with our Chinese friends, we will continue responding to such attempts by expanding our political, economic and other cooperation, and coordinating steps in the world arena.

Russia has a similar approach in relations with India, our specially privileged strategic partner. We intend to build up our truly multifaceted bilateral cooperation. We regard India as an independent, strong centre of the multipolar world. We have a similar foreign policy philosophy and priorities.

Cooperation between Russia and ASEAN contributes to maintaining stability and security, as well as ensures sustainable development in the Asia-Pacific. It is important to deepen and improve, in every possible way, the experience we have accumulated over 30 years of productive political, economic and social cooperation with ASEAN.

It is equally important to maintain the intensive work with our partners in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, consistently implementing existing initiatives for post-pandemic economic recovery, stimulating trade in goods and services, investment and technological exchange, and expanding humanitarian contacts.

Russia has always acted and will continue to act as an impartial mediator to resolve conflicts and crises in the Middle East and help stabilise that region in every possible way. Our direct involvement contributed to defeating international terrorism in Syria, preventing the country from disintegrating, and to launching the intra-Syrian settlement process under the auspices of the UN, as part of the Astana format with Turkey and Iran.

Russian diplomacy should continue to contribute to the normalisation of relations between Syria and the Arab countries and an early return to the League of Arab States, as well as to enlist international assistance to improve the humanitarian situation in that country.

Assisting in the advancement of the Israeli-Palestinian peace process is of fundamental importance for the improvement of the situation in the Middle East. We need to continue balanced and purposeful work with all parties to the Libyan conflict, to direct them towards finding a compromise. Overall, forging a truly friendly, pragmatic and non-ideology based dialogue with all states in the Middle East remains our unconditional priority.

Russia intends to continue to focus on cooperating with the African states, building comprehensive and mutually beneficial ties. By the way, this was the purpose of a recent decision to strengthen the staff of the Africa Department at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. As you know, in 2019, Sochi hosted the first Russia-Africa summit; the parties are exploring the possibility of holding the next meeting in 2022.

With regard to Latin American and Caribbean countries, this region has always been interested in cooperating with Russia, and interest is growing, especially in the wake of our major supplies of vaccines and medicines to combat the coronavirus. We have formed a circle of countries on the continent that we traditionally maintain good and close relations with, and this circle is expanding, so we need to keep this process going.

Regarding European affairs, I have to state with regret that the opportunities for cooperation continue to narrow. Even though the EU remains our leading trade and economic partner, the previously rather productive Russia-EU cooperation is currently experiencing major difficulties.

The EU continues to push us back with its sanctions, unfriendly actions and unfounded accusations while ignoring the obvious benefits of interaction in politics, the economy and culture. We must not forget that we are neighbours and, as we know from history, dividing lines on the continent have never led to anything good. Of course, Russia is interested in maintaining neighbourly and constructive ties with the European countries, but everything depends on our partners’ willingness to establish and maintain equal and respectful cooperation.
A similar, if not more depressing, situation prevails in our relations with NATO which has adopted a markedly confrontational stance and is stubbornly and demonstratively bringing its military infrastructure closer to our borders, as I mentioned earlier. Moreover, NATO was the one that broke our dialogue mechanisms. Of course, we will provide a proper response to NATO’s military activity along Russia’s borders, but, most importantly, Brussels must understand that alleviating military-political tensions is not only in Russia's interest, but also in the interest of Europe and the world in general.

Out of the blue, they expelled our diplomats without providing any reason for doing so, and then they take offence at us closing their [diplomatic] mission in Russia. Why take offence? This was their initiative. They did it with their own hands and then started looking for someone to blame. Well, if they do not want to cooperate with us, okay, don’t, it is not that we are desperate to cooperate with them. I think they will want to, they are already sending signals that they want to cooperate, but why did they expel our diplomats just like that, out of the blue, for no reason? Is it some kind of sport for them?

This also applies, by the way, to Russia-US relations, which, as you know, largely underlie global security and stability. At this point, these relations, to put it mildly, are in an unsatisfactory state. The diplomats from both countries are experiencing major problems. Embassy staffs have been cut and the embassies cannot function properly, let alone systematically engage in expanding bilateral ties. These are the consequences of the provocative policy pursued by US authorities, which began to practice large-scale bans and restrictions for Russian diplomats five years ago.

Our property in the United Sates has been seized in violation of every international standard and rule, every single rule. They have grossly violated the rules, just took our property and that was that – where is the Vienna Convention now? They even refuse to talk to us about it. Isn’t this strange, in the seemingly civilised world we live in? Or it is not so civilised after all.

Nevertheless, the summit with President Biden in Geneva last June opened up a few opportunities for a dialogue and gradual alignment, straightening out our relations, and it is important that both sides consistently expand the agreements reached.

Indeed, something is already being done, this much must be admitted: joint work has begun on the strategic stability and information security agenda. True, our interests, assessments, and positions on many bilateral and international issues differ – this is indeed so and everyone is well aware of it – sometimes the difference is dramatic. However, I would like to say this again, we are open to contact and an exchange of views, to a constructive dialogue.

Colleagues,

The points that I made here show that the diplomatic service is definitely shouldering a heavy burden, which is constantly increasing. You have to work under very difficult and challenging conditions. The state will continue to heed any pressing problems with diplomatic service employees, and to strengthen their social guarantees.

We have made a few steps towards this in the past few years. Two basic laws have been adopted – on the diplomatic service and on the status of Russian ambassadors and permanent representatives in foreign states. A new remuneration system has been introduced, which increased the incomes of employees at the Foreign Ministry headquarters. The headquarters was slightly upsized, and the Foreign Ministry’s proposals on expanding Russia’s diplomatic and consular presence in a number of CIS countries have been approved, too. We will continue to keep all these matters under review, and to support useful initiatives from the top Ministry officials.

To conclude my remarks, I would like to thank all the employees of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for their high-quality and dedicated work, and to wish them every success.

Taking this opportunity, I would like to again express my special gratitude to the diplomatic service veterans, who could not join us in this room today for obvious reasons, and I would ask you to convey to them my best wishes of good health and happiness.

Thank you for your attention.



////



Meeting with deputies of the eighth State Duma
Event_Date: 21/10/2021
Event_Time: 15:35
Event_Place: The_Kremlin_Moscow

Deputies of the State Duma, Mr Volodin,

 I am glad to welcome all of you in the Kremlin on the day of the first session of the State Duma of the eighth convocation and congratulate all of you on the beginning of its work and, of course, on your victory in the competitive, open elections.

I am pleased to note that the lineup of the parliament has a substantial number of new members. Out of 450 deputies, 218, almost half, will work in the State Duma for the first time. But all of you, all without exception, are active and engaged people. You have already established yourselves in politics, in public service, and in your profession.

It was the United Russia party that set this trend for renewal. In its parliamentary party, which has kept the constitutional majority – 48.5 percent, also almost a half, are new deputies.

The CPRF, A Just Russia – For Truth and the LDPR have confirmed their important role in the parliament. The New People, elected to the State Duma for the first time, has also formed its parliamentary party.

All this proves that the political system of Russia is developing, meeting the changing requirements of society, and giving an opportunity for energetic and purposeful people to become politicians at the federal level.

At the same time, many newly-elected deputies have served with several State Duma convocations, and this is important for successful law-making and for developing the best parliamentary traditions. It goes without saying that continuity should exist. As you know, these traditions are maintained by people who have created and expanded them, rather than in offices and conference rooms.

Certainly, your experience was needed during preparations for this first meeting. I know that this short but important and responsible period was well-coordinated and productive for the parliamentary parties and the deputies’ working groups.

As a result, the key organisational matters were quickly resolved today, the parliamentary parties were registered, the committees and commissions were formalised under State Duma regulations, the line-up and chairs have been determined, and the house leaders have been elected. Now you can work confidently on reviewing the packed legislative agenda.

Colleagues,

You represent all regions, as well as various professional and social communities. Each parliamentary party has its own election programme. But I am confident that all of you are united by a striving to work in the interests of Russia, for the sake of successful future development, and for consolidating our traditional values as stipulated by the updated Constitution, and of course, to improve people’s well-being and quality of life.

You have your mandates thanks to the people’s will and trust. This support from our multi-ethnic nation, the only source of power in the country, guarantees the State Duma’s power and authority, its responsibility for the country and for all its decisions. I expect you to earn this high level of trust everyday through intensive and effective work.

Every deputy and parliamentary party represents the hopes of specific people, voters, that is, your voters. Even if they are a minority, their votes, requests and proposals should be heard.

You will certainly strive to fulfil your promises and party programmes and to put forth legislative motions. It is important that they be closely linked with our national development goals so that all of us can work together for the sake of the common good.

As you have seen, it is possible to reach much more impressive results by pooling our administrative, financial and common resources, at the municipal, regional, and federal district levels, as well as at the Federal Government level. This gives us much more successful and positive results, and results that are expected from us by the nation, by our people.

Yes, of course, there is no way to avoid differences in approach, in positions or points of view, but this is absolutely normal. A parliament is a venue where people should express different views and where a path to well-balanced decisions should open up in discussions and arguments.

A constructive dialogue between parliamentary parties, broad discussions of key issues with the participation of the regions and civil society organisations, and continuous, working cooperation with the Government of Russia are very important at this point. These are indispensable conditions and a firm foundation for adopting quality, necessary laws that really work.

Our country, and hence all of us, are facing many difficult challenges. I will repeat that the low average income of our citizens, of millions of people, is our main enemy, a threat to steady development and our demographic future.

In the next few years, we need to establish an integral system for supporting families with children, starting from when a mother is expecting a baby to the graduation of her children from school.

As you know, we have started drafting this programme, this system. We are doing this in stages, gradually, ensuring guaranteed benefits at every step. I would like you to continue working this way on other issues as well.

Of course, the ultimate goal is to increase the average income of our people, create jobs in all regions, ensure the continued growth and restructuring of the economy, support high-tech industries and remove the barriers that still impede the development of small business – people should have as many opportunities as possible to increase the well-being of their families.

Serious problems in healthcare, education, housing and the environment demand particular attention. The solution to these and many other problems largely depends on the effective performance of the State Duma, the country’s highest representative body. This is why it is so important for each parliamentary party and each deputy to realise their high responsibility for drafting and adopting laws.

Some of the first bills that you will be considering include the federal budget as well as the budget for social security. These documents, submitted by the Government, have at least three priorities: social policy, economic development, and healthcare, of course.

The largest budget item is social policy, and that primarily includes support for families with children, and senior citizens. Over the next three years, the Government plans to allocate 41.5 trillion rubles for social needs, 15.1 trillion rubles for economic development and support for the regions, and 10.9 trillion rubles for healthcare.

I would like to note that every other ruble to be spent under the bills on the federal budget and on social security funds will be directed to the implementation of Russia’s social policy and to healthcare.

With the continuing pandemic and the difficult situation in the global economy, there are problems we still need to address. Indeed, the economy has generally recovered to pre-crisis levels as we say, but many problems persist, including inflation. Inflation will exceed the forecasted level of 5.8 percent this year.

Higher inflation naturally hits the poorest population groups hardest. We must be aware of this, keep this in mind and respond accordingly. Let me remind you in this regard that social monetary benefits, which come from the federal budget, should be indexed to actual inflation in 2022. Federal coffers contain sufficient funds to do this, and I would like to bring this to the attention of the State Duma deputies and the Government.

As it is, maternity capital remains the only social support measure that is being indexed to forecasted inflation. I propose, starting from 2022, to start indexing maternity capital based on the previous year’s actual inflation as well, not the projected figure.

(Applause.)

I ask the deputies to adopt the necessary amendments to the law. I believe this decision will be right and fair.

We are always attentive to those who need government support. This year, we have made lump sum payments to pensioners and families with school-age children. I instructed the Government to submit additional proposals on social support measures, which are of the essence in the context of high inflation. We will consider these proposals at a meeting in the near future.

I would also like to stress that the United Russia party went to the elections with a programme based on proposals from people from all regions of our country. These initiatives must be fully reflected in the draft law on the budget, and the factions, of course, must monitor the implementation of these projects so that they bear results before the deadline.

I would like to note once again that making our national ideas and the constructive, substantive priorities in the parliamentary parties’ programmes a reality is our common task. It requires the joint, coordinated work of all factions. I hope that this is how it will be in practice, and, let me repeat, the activities of the State Duma will only be successful if the deputies strive to develop the solutions that our country, society and citizens need.

United Russia, which holds over two-thirds of the mandates, demonstrated this approach during the preparations. It could lead most committees, but the faction continued the traditions of the previous convocation and, when approving the leadership of the committees, provided other factions with the opportunity to chair almost half of them. Thus, the opinion of voters, your voters, colleagues, of those who voted for these parties, was taken into account, and they received additional opportunities for effective and responsible work in order to fulfil the demands of their voters.

Colleagues,

The legislative process requires thoughtful and professional work as well as consideration of many factors, such as financial sources (those above all, perhaps) and, most of all, knowing and understanding people’s requests, essential interests and needs. This is why you should always stay in touch with your voters, know their worries and daily problems, and help them without fail.

Now I would like to address those who are part of parliament for the first time. Those who have worked here for more than one convocation know about this, and this is what they are doing. This is my point: the drafting and adoption of laws, lawmaking is the main activity of the Duma, for all deputies; this is clear, understandable. However, for the people, for your voters you are primarily their representatives. Do not forget this. People can and will address you with diverse questions. Maybe some will not be within your competence, but they rely on you, so remember that they went out and voted for you.

I would also like to ask you to comprehensively analyse how the regions are carrying out our national goals and to help them promptly when your support is needed. The State Duma deputies have the authority to do this, including parliamentary control.

I would also like to talk about the situation with the coronavirus infection. There is no getting away from this today. You know that the number of infections is growing in many regions and medical specialists are working in difficult conditions. We all know well that vaccination can save us from the virus and from a severe course of the disease. It is necessary to step up the vaccination pace. I would like to ask you to be most active in this work, to educate people and speak in the media. People trust and listen to your advice and recommendations. It is very important to do this without a tone of administrative reprimand. We should persistently and patiently work with the people and explain to them the benefits of preventing this dangerous disease.

Colleagues,

In conclusion, I would like to emphasise again the importance of continuity in your activities – in both the lawmaking process and your ability to create an atmosphere of trust, mutual respect and cooperation, while being open to society and our people.

The deputies of the previous, seventh convocation did a lot to promote the traditions of Russian parliamentarism that had its 115th anniversary this year. I hope your deputy corps will not only preserve the best traditions of this most important historical heritage but will also make its own contribution to its development.

I would like to wish you success in serving Russia and our people. All the best to you.

Thank you.



////



Military-Industrial Commission meeting
Event_Date: 10/10/2021
Event_Time: 17:10
Event_Place: Novo-Ogaryovo_Moscow_Region


Colleagues, good afternoon.

Last week we had a series of meetings on developing the Armed Forces and the defence industry where we discussed system-wide tasks pertaining to re-equipping the Army and Navy. We will continue this discussion at the Military-Industrial Commission meeting today.

The first item on our agenda is to consider the main results of state armament programme implementation, and outline the approaches to drafting the new programme for 2024–2033.

I have already noted that the state armament programme, which is one of our most significant strategic planning documents, plays a special role in upholding Russia’s security and defence. Its priorities include defining and implementing projects under the state defence order, expeditiously taking science and technology advances into serial production, and developing promising new weapons, of course.

I would like to note that in 2020, a difficult year, a demanding one, our defence companies fulfilled the state order at 96.2 percent. As a reminder, in 2012, they achieved just over 80, and that was considered good. Now we have climbed to such a high level, and that high bar has been maintained for more than five years. Even with the restrictions necessitated by the coronavirus pandemic, the defence industry has maintained stability, allowing no disruptions or delays in supplies.

As a result, the share of up-to-date weapons and equipment in the strategic nuclear forces exceeds 80 percent, and in the general-purpose forces, it is above 70 percent.

Russian troops have been supplied with the latest weapons, which are not inferior to their foreign counterparts in their tactical and technical parameters, and are even superior in some respects. Among them are the fifth-generation Su-57 fighter, the Knyaz Vladimir nuclear-powered missile carrier, and the S-500 anti-aircraft missile system.

Obviously, in drafting a new state armaments programme we need to comprehensively consider the global trends as we develop combat hardware and arms. We need to focus on introducing advanced information, bio- and cognitive technology, hypersonic arms, weapons based on new physical principles, as well as cutting-edge reconnaissance, navigation, communications and control systems. We should enhance the utility and combat sustainability of military products, partly through artificial intelligence and, of course, extensive use of robotics. Again, these areas will decisively determine the future look and combat potential of our Armed Forces.

The second item on our agenda is the implementation of the programme for diversifying defence production lines. This is very important for the sustainable and balanced development of military-industrial complex (MIC) companies and our entire economy and its high-tech branches in the long-term perspective.

Specific objectives and targets in this field were set as early as 2016, and I must say we have done a lot in this respect in the past five years.

In recent years, the output of civilian products in total MIC production has been increasing steadily. It was 20.9 percent in 2018, 24.1 percent in 2019 and now, 25.6 percent in 2020. It is even higher in some areas of the MIC.

At the same time, we have to do better in this area in the future, and we certainly have the reserves for this. We continuously speak about this with corporate executives. It is important to set the correct priorities and to draft mid- and long-term plans on this foundation.

We said at a meeting of the commission last year that MIC companies should make broader use of the opportunities opened by national projects and state programmes. Active involvement in these will allow these companies to considerably increase the output of civilian products and introduce advanced technology. Thus, our industry, both civilian and defence, already meets more than half of the requirements of national projects in machines and equipment.

As you know, the Government has the authority to determine the amounts, the so-called quotas of state purchases and purchases by companies with state participation. This applies only to domestically produced products. As we have seen, this mechanism is up and running: the share of domestic goods in municipal and state purchases increased to 60.9 percent in the first nine months of 2021, from 55.6 percent in 2020.

We must make the most of these opportunities and more actively engage in the fields where defence industry products are in demand. We know these fields: they include ship- and aircraft manufacturing, medical equipment production, the construction industry, and transport and energy engineering, to name a few. At this point, I would like to emphasise again that it is necessary to thoroughly monitor the quality of these products. They must be fully competitive with their foreign counterparts – both in price and in technical specification.

I would like you to report today on the specific plans to diversify defence production and any additional, comprehensive solutions that would make it possible to increase demand for the MIC’s civilian products and ensure the priority of domestic producers in our internal market.

Finally, under the third item on our agenda, we will review nominees for the position of a general designer of arms and combat hardware and the position of head of a priority technological branch in the MIC.

I would like to note that this managerial structure has justified itself. It has made it possible to focus authority and clearly define responsibility for implementing practical goals. I hope the people endorsed today will have the right qualities and can confirm their professional and business qualifications, form strong teams (in fact, the teams are already in place but should be, of course, supported and developed) and contribute to implementing key national defence and security projects.

This is all I wanted to say by way of an opening remark. Let us get down to business.



////


The President held a videoconference meeting on current issues with permanent members of the Security Council.
Event_Date: 9/10/2021
Event_Time: 16:55
Event_Place: Novo-Ogaryovo_Moscow_Region

Colleagues, good afternoon.

We have two items on the agenda today.

The first one concerns the implementation of the basic principles of Russia’s state border policy. I will say right off that much has been done in this area in recent years, as we will discuss in a moment.

The second item on the agenda concerns the COVID-19 incidence rate and measures to reduce it. I would like to hear from you about the impact of measures we have taken. I am referring to the non-working days that ended recently. We will also discuss plans for the near future in this regard.

For this, I asked Tatyana Golikova, Healthcare Minister Mikhail Murashko, Anna Popova and Sergei Sobyanin to join our discussion.

I suggest that we begin with the second item, so we do not keep them waiting and do not feel pressed for time when discussing the first item, as well as current matters related to ensuring security in Russia across various spheres and environments.

We are dealing with these issues on a daily basis, and we have discussed all these topics with many of you this morning. We will talk about the current situation with permanent members of the Security Council in more detail.

Shall we start? Our invited colleagues are ready. Ms Golikova, go ahead please.




////



Meeting with Defence Ministry leadership and heads of defence industry enterprises
Event_Date: 3/10/2021
Event_Time: 16:40
Event_Place: Sochi


Good afternoon, colleagues.

We are holding today our final meeting in this series on strengthening and improving the Armed Forces. Today we will discuss the progress in equipping our army and navy with systems based on new physical principles.

Developing unique laser, hypersonic, kinetic and other types of weapons was a huge breakthrough in military technology for Russia. It has significantly, many-fold boosted the capacity of the Russian Armed Forces ensuring a high level of Russian military security for many years and even decades to come and it helped strengthen our strategic parity.

The development and production of these effective and innovative hi-tech weapons is a key development vector for our Armed Forces. Of course, it takes time, extra effort and funding because each particular model is the result of long hard work by thousands of scientists, engineers, programmers and other specialists.

I have noted several times that the Russian military-industrial complex, our fundamental and applied science, have done a lot of groundwork in this area. Tests have convincingly confirmed the unique characteristics of the Peresvet laser systems, and the Avangard and Kinzhal hypersonic weapons.

I would like to add that tests of the sea-based Tsirkon hypersonic cruise missile are nearing completion. During the tests, these missiles pointedly destroyed both land- and sea-based targets from submarines and surface ships in full conformity with their objectives. The Russian Navy will start receiving these missiles next year.

Now it is particularly important to develop and introduce the technology needed for developing new hypersonic weapon systems, and more powerful lasers and robotic systems that will be capable of effectively countering potential military threats. Thus, they will further enhance our national security.

I would like to emphasise a very important point. The use of artificial intelligence technology is of primary importance in developing these and other advanced weapons systems. We have talked about this at previous meetings. This technology should ensure a breakthrough in improving combat capabilities of weapons.

This technology must be used more comprehensively in troop command and control, communications and data transmission, as well as in precision missile systems.

It is no less important to introduce artificial intelligence technology when developing advanced robotics with higher autonomy, and to control drones and deep-water vessels.

We need to fully reflect these priorities in the new State Armament Programme through 2033. The Defence Ministry is already drafting documents for an integral system of benchmark data for this. The main, fundamental goal in this respect is to make sure that the advanced weapons and equipment that will be produced and delivered to the troops under this programme will reliably protect Russia from potential threats.

In general, we know all this: we will talk about it.


////



Meeting with Defence Ministry leadership and defence industry heads
Event_Date: 1/10/2021
Event_Time: 15:20
Event_Place: Sochi


Good afternoon, colleagues.

We are starting another series of meetings dedicated to technological development and Armed Forces equipment.

As always, the participants include leaders from the Defence Ministry and top defence companies. As we have stated on many occasions, this format makes it possible to comprehensively analyse on a regular basis the state of Russia's defence capability and, if needed, to promptly adjust and update plans for modernising the army and the navy, and to improve the defence companies’ performance.

Today, we will primarily consider a range of topics related to strengthening the Aerospace Forces, one of the most powerful, high-tech, and maneuverable branches of the modern Russian military. Russia’s reliable protection from an aerospace attack and maintaining strategic parity directly depend on their combat readiness and technical equipment.

We are all well aware that some of our foreign colleagues have not abandoned their attempts to undermine this parity, including by deploying elements of their global missile defence systems in the immediate vicinity of our borders. We cannot fail to notice these threats to Russia's security and we will respond appropriately and adequately to the situation.

In this regard, I would like to note that in recent years, the Russian Armed Forces’ aerospace defence capabilities have noticeably increased. Our missile attack warning system is functioning smoothly and effectively. Both of its components, the constellation of satellites in orbit and ground-based radar systems – guarantee the detection of potential ballistic missile launches. The system will determine their parameters in a timely manner and notify the military command and control centres.

Under the state armament programme, over the past four years, 25 S-400 anti-aircraft missile systems and over 70 modern fighter jets have been produced, and more than 20 S-300 systems and 90 aircraft have been modernised. As a result, the country’s critical military and industrial infrastructure is protected even more effectively now.

We need to further improve aerospace defence. This need has been prompted by the leading countries’ developing innovative strike weapons with advanced speed parameters. The general military-political situation also requires further effort, prompted partly by the increasing numbers of NATO flights close to Russia, and NATO ships with guided missiles appearing in the Baltic and Black Seas. Just recently, as you know, a US ship entered the Black Sea – it could be seen through binoculars or through the sight of our defence systems. US plans to deploy medium-range missiles in Europe are also well known, and that also poses a great danger and threat to us.

Therefore, in accordance with the earlier adopted decisions, our troops must be supplied, in the next few years, with an additional more than 200 aircraft and 26 S-350 and S-400 anti-aircraft missile systems, as well as the first production prototype or first production models of the latest S-500 antiaircraft missile system. Generally, the current rates of reequipping the air and missile defence forces will make it possible to bring the level of modern hardware to at least 80 percent by 2025–2027.

In the process, special attention must be paid to the development of the centralised air and space defence control system, the integration of the sub-systems of intelligence and warning of air or space attack into a single information space, and the deployment of advanced space systems. The updated air and space defence system must detect hypersonic and ballistic targets of all types at long distances and then be able to destroy them along the entire trajectory of their flight.

In addition, the military-industrial complex must expedite the development rates of modern weapons for air and space defence, and quickly begin full-scale production using domestic hardware and components. Today, I would like to hear detailed reports on progress in these areas, on existing problems, and proposals on what we should adjust in the near future to guarantee the failsafe implementation of all our plans.

One more extremely important goal is to provide the Russian Navy with modern equipment and weapons.

In the past four years, the Navy has received 49 new warships and combat craft, nine coastal missile systems and ten aircraft. The programme to upgrade the fleet is making steady headway. In general, by 2027, the number of modern weapons should exceed 70 percent.

The formation of shipborne strike groups operating in the near marine area is close to completion. The decisions made during the Sochi consultations and other meetings have made it possible to start increasing the construction of warships for the off-shore maritime and ocean zones. Over 30 of these warships are being built or modernised now. This includes a new class of ship – universal landing ships.

The upgrading of the fleet is of crucial, strategic, national importance to us. This is why we are regularly taking part in the keel-laying ceremony of new ships – both surface ships and submarines. And we will continue to do so.

I would like to add that Navy warships and vessels continuously take part in long distant patrols. They carry out operational and training missions and display the flag in the ocean and sea zones of importance to Russia. I would like to recall that in the 2000s, in the early 2000s, such patrols were episodic if not sporadic.

Let me repeat, we need to continue the course of technically reequipping the fleet. I would like to draw your attention to several important points.

First, we need to be more active in introducing advanced technology, equipment and materials; actually, this is obvious, but I will still make the point. This will improve the operational specifications of ships and submarines and create an opportunity to use new types of weapons.

The second point. Considering the buildup of foreign navies with modern nuclear-powered submarines, aircraft carrying and strike ships, and unmanned ships, we must expedite the development of our naval aviation, primarily by supplying the Navy with advanced aircraft and air weapons and conducting a large-scale modernization of existing systems. I would like to hear today what is being done to resolve this task.

Before we move to the issues on our agenda, I would like to hear a separate – brief, but separate – report on the vaccination of military personnel in the Armed Forces. I spoke recently with the Defence Minister and asked him to prepare this report. It is brief but I want to hear it today anyway.

Go ahead, please.
 told the Prime Minister about this today, and his deputy, Tatyana Golikova, and the Health Minister. I have just spoken to all of them. We have a very difficult situation in Russia today, more than 40,000 infected [a day], this has never happened before.

We definitely need to continue this effort, which is certainly extremely important for all Russians, and even more so for the Armed Forces – two or three times as important – because we absolutely need all of our military members in the service and in good health. The combat readiness of the Armed Forces depends on this.

Therefore, I ask you to continue this work, and to continue to support civil medicine. If necessary, perhaps, you might want to use your construction capacity, because there is a need to continue building prefabricated medical facilities.

I would also like to address my colleagues from industry. Perhaps, this concerns the Armed Forces to a lesser extent – I will explain in a minute – and the civilian sector, to a greater extent. Here is what I mean. We know that senior citizens have an increased risk of severe illness – this is an obvious fact today, and the mortality rate among that age group is several times higher than the national average, for the entire population.

What I am saying, you have employees of different generations working at your enterprises, including the older generation – please keep this under review, including the observance of all the necessary precautions to prevent the spread of the disease. This certainly applies to the entire country, but now I am addressing those who are present at this meeting.

On vaccination – vaccines can really protect from severe illness and death. True, new drugs are being developed, and I am sure we will be able to use them soon, I also spoke with my colleagues about this today, with those working on this; but still, the most universal and best way to protect yourself is to get vaccinated. And for the army – in fact, this concerns everyone, including the army – timely revaccination is necessary.

I occasionally speak with my colleagues in countries where more than 60 percent of the population has been vaccinated, and they still cannot avoid a new outbreak. I asked them personally, what happened. They failed to start revaccinating on time, missed the moment – we must bear this in mind, too.

Even when people get vaccinated, as the minister just said, we need to monitor what happens after that and make appropriate decisions and act on time.

Let us get started.





////



Address to citizens of Russia
Event_Date: 16/9/2021
Event_Time: 00:00
Event_Place: The_Kremlin_Moscow


Citizens of Russia, friends,

In the next few days, on September 17, 18 and 19, we are going to elect deputies to the State Duma.

The election of a new legislature is a vital event in the life of our society, our country. All of us are equally interested in electing responsible, energetic and respected members of parliament, who can keep their word, fulfil your requests and their promises and live up to the hopes and trust of the citizens of Russia.

I would like to emphasise that the ultimate essence of elections is the expression of their will by the people of Russia as the main source of power and the implementation of the citizens’ constitutional right to determine the development course of our country, which all of us want to be sovereign and prosperous.

We will need to do a great deal together, and the implementation of our plans depends in great measure on the efficient and competent work of the State Duma. It is one of the main bodies in the system of state power in Russia. It plays the main role in the law-making process, in adopting laws that have the highest legal power in protecting human rights and interests.

The federal budget, the country’s fundamental financial document, which the parliament adopts as well, creates the basis for implementing the state’s social guarantees, support programmes for families with children, regional development plans, and the development of cities and towns across our vast country.

It is an extremely challenging and painstaking job that has no place for populism or empty rhetoric. It calls for top professionalism and implies a clear awareness that every decision and legislative amendment can influence the lives of millions.

Under the renewed Constitution of Russia, the State Duma enjoys the crucial power of approving the candidacies of the Prime Minister, his deputies and federal ministers. I will be honest with you: a great deal will depend in future on the constructive and functional interaction between the legislative and executive branches of power.

The modern world is a complicated place. We can see that it is changing rapidly and sometimes unpredictably. This certainly poses new challenges, but also offers new, broad opportunities. To be able to rise up to these challenges and make efficient use of the new opportunities, we need well-coordinated teamwork by the state, society and citizens. We need a strong and respected parliament, so that the deputies of the new State Duma act in the interests of Russia and our people and work for the people, so that we can rely on them as the true patriots of Russia who are ready to resolutely and consistently guarantee our national interests in all spheres.

Friends,

I ask you to take part in the upcoming voting, choosing one of the days that suit you most, starting September 17, to come to the polling stations or to use the option of remote e-voting. Its safety and reliability are guaranteed by up-to-date technology.

I count on you to take a responsible, substantiated and patriotic civil position, on your desire to elect the deputies who will work for the benefit and in the interests of our beloved Motherland, in the interests of the entire nation and each citizen of Russia.

Please, make your choice.



////



Plenary session of the Eastern Economic Forum 
Event_Date: 3/9/2021
Event_Time: 12:35
Event_Place: Russky_Island_Primorye_Territory


President of Russia Vladimir Putin: I think that this was clear enough as it was, but even so, thank you.

Sergei Brilyov: Unlike you, I do have my phone with me.

By the way, Mr President, do you have a mobile phone?

Vladimir Putin: No.

Sergei Brilyov: Not even from the old St Petersburg days? Something like 8–921… No?

Vladimir Putin: No.

Sergei Brilyov: Well I have my phone with me, and a notification popped up on its screen to remind me that it was right here, in Primorye, that I recorded my first interview with you eight years ago, as if I needed to be reminded of that fact. It did not happen in public or during Direct Line, but in the Ussuri taiga during a trip to see the tigers. I have to tell you that it is thanks to you that I came to take so much interest in the Far East. Since then I have been in so many places here: Khasan, Iturup, Zvezda right across the strait from here, the aircraft factory in Komsomolsk-on-Amur, Lenskiye Stolby. The problem with being a journalist is that no matter where you go to film a report, you keep hearing: “Putin has been here, so let’s follow in his footsteps.”

You will soon address the honorary guests, your colleagues, but please let us take a minute and speak about the residents of the Far East. Mr President, what makes you return here, to these people, so often?

Vladimir Putin: The residents of the Far East, both the previous generation and the current one, are pioneers. Can you imagine the work that needed to be done to explore these territories, the scale of it? What personal and management qualities must there have been to achieve the results that we are seeing today?

By the way, the current generations are also to a large extent explorers because many things that are being done here are being done for the first time. This spirit of exploration, the spirit of those who move forward, who aspire and achieve results is the distinctive quality of the local residents, I believe.

But the development of the Far Eastern region is of huge importance to Russia, to the country. These are development prospects for not even decades but centuries ahead. If we add the Arctic to these territories, it will be even clearer why we have been paying so much attention to this region over the recent years.

The Arctic comprises 18 percent of our territory; it has the world’s reserves of resources, needed not only by our country but the entire world. In this sense, we have a huge responsibility to manage these riches wisely and sustainably.

This is why Russia pays so much attention to the development of the Far Eastern territories.

Sergei Brilyov: Let us then agree on the format. Now we will move on to official speeches and recorded videos. Let us move to the official part, so to say.

I again want to greet President of Kazakhstan Kassym-Jomart Tokayev and President of Mongolia Ukhnaagiin Khurelsukh. But first I will give the floor to the President of Russia, the host country, Vladimir Putin.

Mr President, please.

Vladimir Putin: Thank you.

Mr Tokayev, we just had the pleasure of talking to each other at the launch of a fairly big joint project by Kazakhstan’s government bodies and Sberbank, or Sber Group. I would like to once again thank you, Mr President, for making a choice in favour of the Russian partner.

So, Mr Tokayev, Mr Ukhnaagiin Khurelsukh, ladies and gentlemen, friends.

I welcome all the participants and guests of the Eastern Economic Forum.

Once again, after a break caused by the pandemic, Vladivostok welcomes company heads, businesspeople and experts from dozens of countries.

I am very happy that the presidents of Kazakhstan and Mongolia accepted our invitation. They are taking part in the plenary session via videoconference, as we can see. The leaders of China, India and Thailand sent their greetings to the forum.

Such broad representation and an interest in the development of the Russian Far East show that the economy is recovering and returning to its normal business mode. Russia is open to mutually beneficial partnership with all countries in the Asia-Pacific Region.

I would like to note that the APR, which accounts for one third of the global GDP, has been a driver of the global economy for a long time; this is a well-known fact. The growth rates of the region’s countries invariably exceed the world’s average.

Russia – and I would like to stress it even though it is obvious – Russia is an inalienable part of the APR, and we will establish in our Far Eastern regions a powerful centre for attracting capital and the new economy, create a space of opportunities for citizens to implement the most daring business ideas and projects. Let me emphasise that even under the tough conditions of the pandemic and its economic impact we did not give up the implementation of the long-tern development plans for the Far East. On the contrary, we tried to speed them up.

I would like to tell you about the outcome of these efforts. At any rate, this is what I am going to start with, and also I will also talk about the new decisions that already have been adopted or are about to be adopted to strengthen the economy and the social sphere in the region.

The volume of accumulated foreign direct investment in the Russian Far East has almost doubled in the past six years, reaching $80 billion. Industrial growth in the region exceeded the national average. During the same period, industrial production in the region has shown a growth rate of around 20 percent, or twice the national rate. New special mechanisms for supporting capital investment have allowed more than 2,500 residents to register in the priority development territories and the free port of Vladivostok. Sixty-eight thousand modern jobs have been created. Global projects in aviation, shipbuilding, chemical industry, gas processing and logistics have been launched in the Far Eastern regions such as the Amur Region, the Khabarovsk Territory and the Primorye Territory.

This kind of diversity is gratifying. This diversification of the region’s economy cannot but inspire us to achieve new heights across all these industries. The region already had its combat aviation and we have started developing and continue to successfully develop civil aviation as well. The shipbuilding industry fell into almost total ruin after the Soviet era. Now it is experiencing a revival, based on new technologies, with new products in development and excellent long-term orders. The chemical industry is developing, not to mention the gas processing industry. I think these projects are well known. This is what the overall progress in the Russian Far East has been like, each region working on a wide variety of projects. We continue to elevate conventional industries as well – for example, developing large ore and metal deposits in Chukotka, the Trans-Baikal Territory and Buryatia.

I would like to praise local management teams for improving the business climate. A great deal has been done locally and I would like to thank regional officials for that. Four Far Eastern regions were included in the top 30 of the 2020 National Investment Climate Ranking. I hope this number will continue to grow. It was zero not so long ago.

We are working constantly on reinforcing guarantees and expanding opportunities for businesses all over Russia. We know very well that new advanced solutions are always in demand, especially in the Far East, a region aiming for priority development at a rate above the national average. Obviously, we need to create a competitive environment for our partners, which means that the parameters such as the tax burden, the cost of debt, the delivery and quality of government services for businesses must be competitive on a global level. As I have just said, they must be the best in the Asia-Pacific. This is an extremely difficult task but we must keep working to fulfil it.

We are planning to create an unprecedented package of benefits and incentives on the Kuril Islands. We will relieve business of many taxes – profit, property, land and transport taxes for a long period of ten years. Let me emphasise that I am referring to the companies that are operating on the islands, that erect buildings, create businesses and hire employees, not those that are just registered there. These companies will also pay reduced insurance premiums of 7.6 percent for ten years.

In addition, we will establish a free customs zone on the entire territory of the Kurils. It will be easier to import commodities and equipment and export finished products. No VAT will be levied within this zone before goods leave the Kurils.

Let me make a reservation at this point that not all types of activities will enjoy these preferential tax incentives. They will not apply to intermediaries, the production of excisable goods, the extraction and processing of hydrocarbons or harvesting precious water bio-resources. Obviously, these activities are highly profitable as they are.

I would like to emphasise that foreign investors will also be able to use these tax, customs and administrative benefits, not just domestic companies. This certainly applies to our neighbours, including our Japanese partners. We have spoken with them before about the need to create conditions for the economic development of these islands and the promotion of cooperation there.

Using this opportunity, I would like to make a small digression. This year, Japan hosted the Olympics. The Paralympics will be over in the next few days. I would like to congratulate the Organising Committee, the leaders and all citizens of Japan – I know some Olympic executives and organisers personally – on holding these successful events at such a high level in difficult conditions. They created all the best conditions for the competitions and the athletes.

Back to our subject, I would like to express my hope that the preferential tax incentives for businesses on the Kurils will produce tangible results for development and will be an impetus for promising projects, primarily in such areas as tourism, aquaculture and fish processing. This is important for Russia, and of course, for our citizens in the Far East to have new points of economic growth with high export potential. This should provide additional jobs and higher incomes and encourage the development of small and medium companies.

Today railways, roads and sea ports in the Far East provide for a large part of Russia’s international trade, and we are working towards expanding their capacities and developing the main infrastructure, first of all, the throughput capacity of the Baikal-Amur Mainline and Trans-Siberian Railway. We have been talking a lot about this lately, and much is being done, but even more needs to be done.

I would like to elaborate on the Baikal-Amur Mainline. Russia has launched this project several times. Back in the first half of the 20th century, research was carried out and sections of the railway were constructed, but only in 1974, almost 50 years ago, did full-scale construction begin.

We will definitely celebrate the 50th anniversary of the construction of the Baikal-Amur Mainline. And today I would like to express my gratitude to the veteran construction workers who built such a necessary and, if I may say so, irreplaceable transport route for Russia in spite of its harsh climate, through the taiga and mountain ridges. Friends, you have laid a strong foundation, and now our task is to fulfil our plans to update the mainline and develop the entire Eastern railway system as scheduled and planned. I hope that we will fully execute this.

What would I like to note? The volume of cargo transported via the railway and Russian sea ports is growing, which means income from exports, revenue to the budget and, in the end, additional resources that we will first allocate to address people’s social problems.

However, we should not forget about the costs, environmental risks and coal dust. It is such a simple thing, but people can feel it, so it’s not a small detail. People can feel this, and not only feel, but rightly complain about such things. We have already made several decisions in this regard, including signing agreements with stevedoring companies. They require Russian ports to introduce environmentally friendly and the best available technologies for the transshipment of goods. Such technologies are being used in Russia more widely. I hope that this will be implemented in the Far Eastern region as well, as quickly as needed.

I believe we should go further and add the requirements for Russian cargo ports, not only Nakhodka and Vladivostok but also Murmansk, Kaliningrad and Novorossiysk among others, to introduce continuous environmental monitoring systems at the legislative level.

A shortage of construction materials is another serious problem plaguing the Far Eastern Federal District that is specific to it. A lot of construction materials have to be brought in from places that are hundreds or even thousands of kilometres away. This, of course, directly affects the speed of construction and the cost of projects not only in the infrastructure sector, but the housing sector as well.

Soon we will need to scale up the production of building materials in the Far East by orders of magnitude. Among other things, we will create a modern cluster of this industry in the Khabarovsk Territory, which has the necessary resource, production and personnel base. Importantly, this cluster will serve the needs of the entire Far Eastern Federal District. I want the Government and our leading companies, including Russian Railways, Rosavtodor and other major users of building materials, to come up with proposals on this. As a matter of fact, they are in the works, if not to say that they are already available, but they must be finalised and implemented as soon as possible.

We will be developing the potential of the Far East as a critical hub of global transport corridors based on a modern materials and technology base with account taken for the most stringent environmental standards, including increasing the Northern Sea Route’s capacities. I would like to note that over the past 10 years, the volume of cargo transport along this route has increased by an order of magnitude. I think I have my numbers right; sometime in 1986 a little over 7 million tonnes were shipped, last year it was 33 million tonnes, and by 2024, this figure should be 80 million tonnes. I am positive that these are not the final figures.

Literally before the plenary session – I just saw our colleagues, the moderators of the sessions that are taking place as part of the forum – a proposal was made to launch a container shipping line along the Northern Sea Route on a regular year-round basis. I have already expressed my opinion there, and I will go over several things here as well: it is necessary to carefully, but without delay, assess the prospects for this transport corridor. This is vital, and we must definitely do this; and we will do it, but we need to work through the technical part. We need to develop the port infrastructure, ensure security, and so on. But it undoubtedly holds the future for global shipments from Asia to Europe and back.

It is important to consider the possibility of opening the first regular service for carrying goods, including containers, between Vladivostok and St Petersburg as early as next year in order to, as they say, break in the route and create a freight shipping base.

Colleagues,

The strategic vector for the development of the Far East is towards a new economy, those areas for economic, scientific and technological development that shape the future, set long-term trends in entire industries, countries, and regions of the world. Here a broad range of opportunities for international cooperation opens up as well as the chance to really look at the development of the traditional sectors and branches of the economy.

Reliable and environmentally friendly energy sources, including autonomous ones, are vital for the Far East with its vast territory and remote towns. Such projects are already being implemented. A floating nuclear thermal power plant, the Akademik Lomonosov power unit, is already operating in Chukotka; the Toreyskaya solar power plant with a capacity of 90 MW was launched in Buryatia; methanol plants are planned in Nakhodka and the Amur Region, and methanol can be used not only as a raw material for chemical production, but also as a next generation fuel, primarily for sea-borne shipping. I ask the Government and the regional authorities to provide maximum assistance in the implementation of these projects.

We must also tap the energy potential of the Far Eastern seas, relying on modern technology, to accommodate the expected development of new markets. The planned Tugurskaya tidal power plant in the southern part of the Sea of Okhotsk is one such project.

Along with other industrial projects, the Far East offers an opportunity to create a powerful industrial cluster for the production of green hydrogen and ammonia. The demand for these products will grow steadily for decades, especially here in the Asia-Pacific region.

The implementation of these plans will definitely require the development and introduction of breakthrough technological solutions in transport, energy and other industries; this is a serious challenge for our economy and science. I ask the Government to analyse all aspects of the creation of a centre for the production of green hydrogen and ammonia in the Far East, including the project’s feasibility and the participation of our foreign partners in it, primarily from Japan and China. After all, all of us have taken on serious nature conservation obligations, these countries, too, and these are the world’s leading economies. I would like to note that such projects meet global and Russian climate-related goals.

In this regard, I will say a few words about climate projects that we are going to promote in the Far East.

The Sakhalin Region – you probably know this, but I will say a few words nevertheless – will become the site for a pilot project that will allow us to work out the issues of regulating the emission and absorption of greenhouse gases on a region-wide scale. As part of this experiment, large companies will provide their carbon reports and present the results of their climate projects. The goal is concrete: by 2026, Sakhalin must reach carbon neutrality, that is, absorb as much carbon as it emits.

Before July 1, 2022, the Government is supposed to develop the entire statutory framework for the implementation of climate projects and the use of carbon units in Russia. It must be done in accordance with international standards. We will discuss this work with the Government in the near future, in October, I believe.

Here I suggest considering expanding the experiment on regulating greenhouse gas emissions to other Russian regions. I know that some of them have expressed their interest.

I would also like to add that the Arctic has a huge impact on the global climate. It is important to understand and forecast the processes going on there, for which we need accurate scientific data. In this regard, I would ask you to speed up the creation of the national permafrost monitoring system, and conclude the development of the statutory framework for its launch before the end of the year.

Russia currently holds the presidency of the Arctic Council. As part of this presidency, we propose an important initiative to organise an international expedition to the high latitudes of the Arctic. The North Pole drifting station, fitted out with the necessary equipment, will be the base for the expedition. The station will be located on a unique ice-resistant platform, which is currently being built in St Petersburg and will be put into operation in the next several months.

Colleagues and friends,

The meaning, value and significance of all the plans that we intend to carry out here is not only and not so much to develop natural resources or attract investment and technology, the main goal is to make life more comfortable for the people in the Far East, allow them to make use of their knowledge and talents, create families, build homes and bring up children.

A special demographic package has been valid here since 2019. It includes higher maternity capital benefits on the birth of a second child, lump sum payments on the birth of the first child, and monthly payment benefits on the birth of a third child and subsequent children. These are special support measures for the residents in this federal district and they are effective. Today, the birth rate in the Far East is higher than the national average.

However, we are still facing many challenges in achieving positive dynamics in population growth. We also discussed this issue at a meeting with our colleagues yesterday. We must drastically change the tide and achieve sustainable positive dynamics in this respect. The key goal here is to improve the quality of life.

Let me remind you that by 2024, the living standards in each region of the Far East must not be below the national average. This comprehensive, difficult task requires consistent work. I am primarily referring to healthcare. Doctors at Far Eastern hospitals, outpatient clinics and first aid care stations are working decently and doing all they can. However, there are obvious problems that we cannot resolve with formal, average formulas and approaches. We must always consider the specifics of each particular region.

I will not go into detail at this point. Obviously, it is necessary to work further on the issues we discussed at yesterday’s meeting. We will do this and carry out our additional support measures.

The Far East is a vast territory with low population density. It is essential to provide these people with quality healthcare. It must be reliable and accessible. Yesterday, we discussed proposals from the United Russia party with our colleagues from the Federal Government and the Far Eastern regional governors and adopted a number of important decisions on this issue.

The first point. We will further increase the current allocations for the healthcare system in the Far East, especially the remote and sparsely inhabited areas. We will allocate over 6 billion rubles a year for this purpose and this will only be the first step.

Second, we have agreed to prolong the Unified Subsidy. Under this programme, 476 social facilities have been built and 700 repaired in the Far East, including schools, kindergartens, outpatient clinics, fitness centres, and medical and midwife stations. Next year, Far Eastern regions will receive an additional sum of around 20 billion rubles for this programme, and at least half of this amount will be allocated for the development of the healthcare infrastructure in the Far Eastern regions. Let me stress that this money will be allocated on top of the 57 billion rubles that are already planned for the programme to upgrade the primary healthcare segment in the Far Eastern Federal District.

There is another task that is important for the entire federal district: 80 percent of the 2,500 Far Eastern post offices are located in remote villages, with three quarters of them in need of major repairs and renovation. As you know, I have supported the proposal of the United Russia party to upgrade and increase the capacities of post offices so that our people will be able to get public services and remotely purchase all the necessary goods, including food and medicines, there. We will begin a major renovation of the postal infrastructure, postal network across Russia, very soon. Far Eastern pilot projects will be launched in the Primorye and Khabarovsk territories as well as in Buryatia.

Next, we have to create all the conditions and opportunities for everyone in the Far East to be able to receive up-to-date education and competences as well as learn an in-demand profession and find a well-paid job.

Let me remind you that United Russia’s proposal also envisages launching a programme of major repairs in general education schools. Over the next five years, we plan to repair more than 1,000 school buildings here in the Far East. Moreover, we will introduce 21,500 new school places by the end of 2023 as part of the school construction programme.

I would like to note that the number of graduates in the Far East is growing, but many of them are leaving to study in other Russian regions today. As a rule, they find jobs there, then start families and settle there. It is necessary to improve the accessibility of secondary and higher vocational education here, in the Far East, while focusing on training highly qualified human resources. In this connection, I, of course, support wholeheartedly the idea of holding the 2023 WorldSkills National Championship for Young Professionals in Khabarovsk. I am sure it will give another boost to the development of the vocational education system in the entire region.

As concerns free higher education, its availability for school graduates in the Far East is still lower than the average availability in other Russian regions. Therefore, in the years ahead, we will continue to increase the number of state-funded places in Far Eastern universities. I have a reference document here but I will not bore you with figures. I think this data needs to be corrected because the number of state-funded places should be even higher than what the Government proposes.

As a concurrent measure, we need to improve the quality of higher education in the Far East, update study programmes, education and research infrastructure – in response to the demands of the economy, employers, the current labour market and, most importantly, the demands of students themselves. We need to attract more highly qualified professors and world-renowned scientists and scholars. The Far Eastern Federal University must become one of the world’s leading universities within the next decade. It must meet the highest international standards in terms of its facilities, research base, the level of teaching and career prospects.

Next, the most vital issue for young professionals and their families (and for all citizens for that matter) is housing, its quality and affordability. A special mortgage programme was launched in the Far East in 2019, under which young families and those who are building their own houses, including on a plot of land granted under the Far Eastern Hectare programme, can obtain a mortgage with a 2 percent interest rate. Around 24,000 families have already used this mortgage offer to improve their living conditions. There has been a proposal to extend this subsidised mortgage programme to other categories such as representatives of essential industries that are in great demand in the Far East. We will discuss this proposal with the Government shortly.

I would like to note that the cost of housing in the Far East has increased significantly lately. There is a shortage of high quality and affordable housing on the market. I would like to remind you about the goal of increasing the scope of residential construction in the Far East by 60 percent compared to the 2019 level by 2024. This is a request for the Government and regional officials to consider additional solutions to stimulate residential property development in the Far East.

It is very important to address the problems of housing availability and the quality of life in a comprehensive manner. The issue of launching a large-scale upgrade programme for Far Eastern cities is long overdue. I am not only talking about the renovation and improvement of residential areas and public spaces. We need to set vectors for the long-term development of these cities. Instead of agglomerating around major production facilities and large plants, as was the case, historically, they must become cities focusing on residents and their needs, comfortable living and growth conditions where there is room for fresh ideas, initiatives and projects for the economy of the future; where there is convenient and eco-friendly public transport available. Cities like Tynda and Severobaikalsk, which are essential for the operation and development of the Baikal-Amur Mainline, must not be overlooked.

I would emphasise that such a programme should be implemented in close communication with the residents, responding to their needs. We will also need to effectively tap the tools and mechanisms we launched recently. I am referring to government loans for infrastructure projects, DOM.RF subsidised bonds and support from the National Wealth Fund.

The Far East should also make intensive use of the opportunities provided by the public transport replacement programme, as well as the Far Eastern concession mechanism, where urban infrastructure, including utilities, is built with private investment, while the state takes on long-term obligations to reimburse these investors.

Development programmes and master plans for each city need to be prepared over the next two years. I propose we consider and approve the first of these at the next Eastern Economic Forum and start implementing them.

Colleagues,

The development of the Far East is a unique effort in terms of its complexity, scale and significance, and at the same time, it is one of the most promising areas. It poses a challenge and offers exciting projects for large, global companies, medium-sized businesses, start-up entrepreneurs, for everyone, for young professionals and experienced professionals alike.

Again, the advanced development of the Far East is our long-term and absolute priority; it is a shared responsibility and job between the Government, the regions, all levels of government, our largest companies, co-owned by the state and the private sector.

The Far East is a region with a special geographic location, climate and nature. Here, courage and endurance are valued, and the people in the Far East have a special character and fortitude, as I said at the beginning of our meeting – they know how to set ambitious goals and achieve them.

All our efforts are aimed at creating up-to-date and comfortable living for people in the Russian Far East, for their incomes to grow, along with their families’ prosperity. I know that we will definitely achieve these results together. And I certainly look forward to your dedicated work and wish you success.

Thank you.

Sergei Brilyov: Mr President, there are many clarifying questions that I will leave for discussion, but allow me to ask one now. This morning, a Russian-Japanese business dialogue meeting was held here at the forum. It was nice to hear the confirmation of so many plans.

You just mentioned the Kuril Islands, a subject brought up here on this platform two years ago, and three years ago.

As I understand it, with this new customs freedom, economic freedom, the Japanese are among the foreign participants. But the Japanese always want more. They have insisted on linking the ownership of Russia’s southern Kurils with the peace treaty more than once or twice.

A constitutional referendum was held between the previous Eastern Economic Forum and this one, and the Russian Constitution now has a new clause stating that the country's territory is indivisible. Accordingly, the South Kurils are part of the Russian Federation forever. Has this not changed the course of negotiations with the Japanese at all?

Vladimir Putin: This has not changed our approach with regard to our interest in concluding the peace treaty. We believe that the absence of the peace treaty in our relations is absurd. Moreover, both Russia and Japan are interested in the complete and absolute normalisation of relations, considering our mutual strategic interest in developing cooperation.

We have always insisted on the need to respect the results enshrined in international documents, the results of World War II. We have never rejected a dialogue on the peace treaty. We agreed with the former Prime Minister that we were ready to rely on the well-known documents from the 1950s, but our Japanese partners kept changing their mind. I have spoken about this many times, but I will repeat it: first we agreed that we would make the decision based on this well-known document (I mentioned it, the 1958 declaration, I believe). Moreover, both the Supreme Soviet and the Japanese parliament ratified that document, but then the Japanese side refused to implement it, and then they asked us to go back, and we agreed that any further progress would be based on that agreement; then the Japanese side upped their demands.

So this seems like an endless process, but of course, we must take into account existing realities. One of them is that when talking about the peace treaty, we must ensure a peaceful future, which means there must be guarantees against surprises from the possible deployment of American armed forces, let alone missile systems, close to our borders. We have conveyed these questions to the Japanese side. We have not received any answers yet. Therefore, I believe that in this sense, the ball is in our partners’ court.

However, we have agreed on the development of these territories more than once, including the implementation of Japan’s proposals. We considered it our duty to organise the appropriate work and create the necessary conditions for economic and commercial activity. The proposals I have outlined – not proposals, strictly speaking, but the plans I have laid out in my remarks – are the implementation of these joint agreements.

Sergei Brilyov: I understand the joint economic and commercial activity, but last year's amendments to the Russian Constitution cancel the 1950s declaration, do they not?

Vladimir Putin: We need to look closely at this declaration, and we need to look closely at the amended Constitution and draw the appropriate conclusions.

Sergei Brilyov: Thank you, Mr President.

We will now continue the part linked with the speeches of the distinguished guests of this session.

Mr Tokayev, President of the Republic of Kazakhstan. I am giving the floor to you.

President of Kazakhstan Kassym-Jomart Tokayev: Mr President Vladimir Putin, ladies and gentlemen,

First of all, I would like to sincerely thank the President of Russia for the invitation to speak at the large-scale Eastern Economic Forum. This forum has rightfully become an influential international dialogue venue dealing with the most topical matters of economic cooperation.

Mr Putin’s detailed speech proves convincingly that the President of Russia has declared the Far East that boasts a unique potential to be a national priority throughout the entire 21st century.

I personally do not view the Far East as an alien territory. In the early 1980s, as a young man, I spent weeks and months in Blagoveshchensk and Khabarovsk, while participating in border demarcation talks with China.

Kazakhstan views this region as a strategic partner because it links Eurasia with the dynamically developing Asia Pacific Region. Asia Pacific countries account for over 50 percent of the world’s population and for over 33 percent of the global GDP. I agree that the Asia Pacific region has already become a global centre of economic activity.

As a major Central Asian economy, Kazakhstan is planning to expand its presence in this region. And this approach reflects the essence of our country’s relations with our Asian partners. All-round cooperation with the Russian Federation, our strategic partner, ally and a great Eurasian power, has become the pivotal element of Kazakhstan’s Eurasian strategy. Other countries of this mega-region are also our important investment and trade partners. Last year, Kazakhstan attracted $3.2 billion worth of direct investments from the Asia Pacific countries, except North and South America. At the same time, three countries, the Russian Federation, China and the Republic of Korea, account for over 80 percent of this total sum.

But, of course, we cannot rest on our laurels, and I would therefore like to single out several areas where we can intensify our work.

First, is strengthening the economic connections in the regions. In order to do this, it is important to speed up the construction of the transport infrastructure. Kazakhstan has become an important transit hub. Even last year, the crisis year, transit via our country grew 17 percent. This is the result of implementing a large infrastructure development plan. We launched this project over 10 years ago now and allocated more than $30 billion to execute it, which made it possible to open five new railways and six new roads connecting Asia and Europe among other things. Moreover, the Aktau port was upgraded and a new Caspian Sea port, Kuryk, was built.

It is important to note the effective alignment of our national plans with the activities of the Eurasian Economic Union, on the one hand, and China’s global Belt and Road Initiative on the other. A kind of synergistic effect has been achieved in the development of continental transport systems. The fastest transit route has been created to deliver cargo from Asia to Europe. Today goods do not only go from China to Europe, but freight traffic is growing in the opposite direction too.

The Kazakhstan transit has proven its economic attractiveness and reliability. This is why we will continue to upgrade the infrastructure, in particular we are beginning to build a new railway line, Dostyk-Moiynty, to expand transit from China. The total volume of investment will amount to over $2 billion.

Various projects to create additional transport corridors in the Eurasian region also look rather promising. Diversification of transit routes has become a reality. The trade along the East-West-East line is gradually increasing, and it is important that this trend is quite stable. It should be remembered that continental transit routes do not only compete between themselves but also with sea routes. This is why I think Eurasian countries should step up cooperation in this sphere. This will help to use the resources of each country more rationally. Regular working meetings between the heads of transport agencies could become such a cooperation mechanism.

Second, I share the Eastern Economic Forum’s idea of establishing new forms of cooperation for unlocking the regional potential. It is in our common interests to find new points of growth that would attract investment, create jobs and facilitate sustainable growth in the future.

There are many examples of successful cooperation. For example, Kazakhstan’s KAZ Minerals is implementing a project to build the Baimsky Mining and Processing Complex in Chukotka.

The Baimsky deposit ranks among the largest in the world. This project was made possible by using the most advanced technologies that helped involve deposits, earlier seen as unprofitable, in economic activity. In this connection, I would like to express my gratitude to you, Mr President and your Government, for the assistance rendered.

Today, the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan and Sber signed a memorandum on establishing a digital government platform on the forum’s sidelines. This is a major breakthrough in both counties’ strategic partnership, and I believe that this is a graphic example of mutual trust between Kazakhstan and Russia.

Joint production of the Sputnik V vaccine in Karaganda is another example of successful cooperation.

Fruitful work is underway at the Astana International Financial Centre that involves over 50 Russian companies.

We continue to cooperate fruitfully in the sphere of space exploration, and we are implementing a joint space project dealing with the Baiterek facility. Work is underway to conduct remote sensing satellite projects and those for upgrading Gagarin’s Start.

Our countries also boast high cooperation levels in the oil and gas industry. In addition to current projects, we have signed agreements with Russia’s Tatneft and LUKOIL earlier this year.

Construction of solar power stations is a new cooperation area. Russia’s Hevel Group has implemented seven projects with a rated capacity of 240 megawatts in Kazakhstan. This year, we have launched construction of a tyre factory, and we have started jointly manufacturing Lada cars. We have signed a number of key documents with AvtoVAZ and KamAZ to implement new investment projects in Kazakhstan.

I would like to separately mention such a useful cooperation format with the Russian Federation as the Interregional Cooperation Forum. The forum’s next meeting is to be held in Kazakhstan later this year. We are counting on the active participation of representatives of Far Eastern state agencies and the business community in this important event.

China is also a strategic partner of Kazakhstan. Over 50 joint projects worth $24.5 billion in total are currently being implemented. Over the past five years, 19 projects with $4.3 billion of investments were implemented. The launch of another four projects is scheduled until the end of the year.

Projects in the field of renewable energy sources worth $700 million are being implemented with the involvement of Chinese companies in Kazakhstan. Trade in agriculture and food products is increasing. It grew 1.7 times over the past four years.

The Republic of Korea, where I was recently on a state visit, is also an important regional partner of Kazakhstan. There are about 550 enterprises in Kazakhstan successfully working with leading Korean corporations. Another 16 prospective investment projects worth over $1.5 billion in the spheres of car production, housing, metallurgy and agriculture are being developed.

In general, attracting foreign investment is an unconditional priority of our country’s economic policy. More than $365 billion of direct foreign investments have been attracted to Kazakhstan. Even during the last year, the crisis one, the net inflow of investments to Kazakhstan increased 35 percent.

Last year, a new special tool was introduced: strategic investment agreement. Under this agreement, the government can select the best personalised set of benefits and incentives for some of the main projects. It is also important that such projects are granted legal and fiscal stability for long-term investments.

The third thing is strengthening trade cooperation with the Asian-Pacific countries. Kazakhstan’s trade with them, excluding the North and South American countries, exceeded $43 billion last year. At the same time, 94 percent of them accounted for Russia, China and Korea. I believe that we have great potential to further develop trade and expand its geography.

Here we should note the role of the Eurasian Economic Union, which promises to become a key player in the global trade and economic community. We already have a free-trade zone with Vietnam as part of the union and plan to launch a free-trade zone in goods and services with Singapore, and the possibility of creating a free-trade zone with Indonesia is being studied. As part of the agreement between the Eurasian Economic Union and China, partner countries are working towards expanding the sectoral cooperation agenda and removing trade barriers. Active work is underway to strengthen cooperation with the Republic of Korea.

Fourth, apart from other things, the pandemic has revealed considerable flaws in global food security. According to UN statistics, food prices have grown by more than 30 percent. This has led to a situation where one in every ten people in the world does not get enough to eat and more than half of them live in Asia. There is a need for joint efforts to provide the destitute with high-quality, affordable food. The world’s leading agricultural countries have an important role to play here.

Kazakhstan could also make a substantial contribution to the common cause. The volume of agrarian production in our country exceeds $15 billion, with over 20 percent of products being supplied to external markets. The number of major world brands operating on Kazakhstan’s market is steadily growing. Within the next five years, we are planning to double the agricultural exports to almost $7 billion, with processed produce accounting for almost 70 percent of the whole amount. The related agencies in Kazakhstan and Russia could consider the possibility of coordinating their efforts in order to bring agricultural products to third country markets.

Kazakhstan is working with China with an eye to expanding the range of food and agricultural exports to the PRC. Long-term cooperation in the product supply area can become yet another example of successful regional cooperation by analogy with transit and transport.

Fifth, transiting to low-carbon development is one of the main and pressing topics at the forum. Specific steps are being taken in this direction all over the world. The European Union is bracing up to introduce a trans-border carbon tax; global corporations and funds are redistributing their portfolios in favour of green assets; investment in the coal industry is declining; and the funding of the oil and gas sector is shrinking. These measures are creating risks for the economies of our countries. Quite possibly, they will lead to a resource shortage, inflation, and a drop in living standards. I believe that we should approach this matter in a maximally pragmatic and, if possible, coordinated manner. Each country is in for a difficult transformation of their technological and economic systems. This is, of course, a challenge to the national economies, but it is only jointly that we can win at the regional, let alone global, level.

Kazakhstan has announced its intention to convert to carbon neutrality by 2060, and the relevant concept is being drafted. We are consistently expanding the share of renewable energy sources in our overall fuel and energy balance. This share now totals three percent, and it will reach 15 percent by 2030. The conversion to “green” growth is the demand of the times and, in effect, it is inevitable.

In my recent address to the people of Kazakhstan, I set the task of fully exploring the possibility of establishing a national nuclear power industry. At the same time, it is important to heed topical state requirements in due measure, naturally, including those of citizens and businesses. I myself believe that the time is ripe to review this matter in detail because Kazakhstan needs a nuclear power station.

Considering the fact that Asia-Pacific countries account for over 60 percent of global energy output, one can assume that these countries face similar tasks of converting to a “green” power industry. Interstate cooperation on topical matters of carbon neutrality is acquiring special significance here.

In conclusion, I would like to say that, unfortunately, despite substantial progress in technologies and the quality of life, the world has become more vulnerable in the security context. Current international mechanisms, called on to ensure consensus, are unable to cope with their tasks at the global and regional level.

Kazakhstan adheres to the principle that Eurasia is our common home. We are ready to promote constructive cooperation in all fields. The states of our unique continent could become a consolidated community, united by the idea of jointly building a future through mutually beneficial trade and economic cooperation. This approach will, certainly, provide a powerful impetus to expanding regional and global cooperation and would create new economic points of growth.

Thank you.

Sergei Brilyov: Mr Tokayev, to begin with, I would like to assume this responsibility and thank you on behalf of all Russians and Russian speakers for your speech in Russian. This confirms the idea from your recent address to the people of Kazakhstan that the Russian language has and will be used. Thank you very much.

Second, I would like to tell you that I closely watched the reaction to your speech in the hall. It is not as easy to see reactions these days because some people are disciplined and wear masks. That said, I can assure you that Rosatom Director General Alexei Lickhachev had a broad smile on his face when you spoke about the nuclear energy industry.

Third, with your permission I would like to touch on an issue that we are bound to discuss in a separate session. Anyway, I would like to mention it. You recently made, though not in your Address, a somewhat mysterious statement about Afghanistan. You said that it does not pose a threat (as I see it, you were referring to a physical threat from the Taliban crossing the river and moving north), but there are some risks. Can I ask you to explain what you meant by this? What exactly do you mean by threats and risks from Afghanistan?

Kassym-Jomart Tokayev: In my opinion, the threats and risks emanating from this much-suffering country are obvious. With the departure of the Americans, it has been left with huge amounts of high-tech weapons, worth over $85 billion. There is a threat of a refugee exodus. I am pleased to say that on these very sensitive issues we have a common position with the Russian Federation and the members of the Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO). Recently, there was a CSTO conference, or summit, at the initiative of the President of Russia. We had a detailed, meaningful discussion of all issues on Afghanistan and decided to adopt a consolidated position on the risks that are emanating from that country.

Naturally, we believe that actions are more important than words, and we are closely following the developments in Afghanistan and the policy of the Taliban, which has come to power in that country. Of course, we want an enduring peace to be established in that much-suffering country.

Thank you.

Sergei Brilyov: I would like to reserve the right to return to this issue. We will talk about it separately.

Now I am giving the floor to the President of Mongolia. Go ahead, please.

President of Mongolia Ukhnaagiin Khurelsukh (retranslated): Mr President Putin, Mr President Tokayev, ladies and gentlemen,

I am glad to welcome you today.

First, I would like to thank the President of the Russian Federation for inviting me to take part in the Eastern Economic Forum.

This forum is being held for the sixth time since 2015, and Mongolia is taking part in it for the fourth time at the head of state level. This proves that Mongolia pays much attention to this forum and demonstrates our sincere desire to continue our mutually beneficial and productive cooperation with the countries of the region.

The number of participants in the forum is growing with every year. It has become a venue for the exchange of views between prominent economic and business leaders, as well as between political, social and scientific circles on a broad range of issues, such as international development, geopolitical stability and humanitarian problems. The forum has become an authoritative mechanism of dialogue in the Asia-Pacific Region. I am confident that it will produce even greater results in the future.

The theme of the current forum is “The opportunities for the Far East in a world under transformation.” It is a forum with specific characteristics because it is held in the difficult time of the pandemic and amid a universal search for ways of swiftly overcoming its socio-economic consequences. In this context, we hope that this forum will play a major role in opening up new opportunities for overcoming the crisis and the aftermath of the pandemic in the Far East and the Asia-Pacific Region, stepping up economic and other cooperation at regional level and facilitating the launch of big mutually beneficial projects and programmes.

Mass vaccination plays a key role in countering the pandemic and reducing its scale. In this context, I would like to express deep gratitude to the countries that are developing, producing and supplying anti-COVID-19 vaccines, including countries and organisations that are helping our country in these difficult times.

Using this occasion, I would like to express sincere gratitude on behalf of the Mongolian people to the governments of the Russian Federation, the People’s Republic of China, and the Republic of India for supplying us with vaccines of their own making during the worst times of the pandemic. I would also like to thank the Government of Japan for financial support.

Global and regional cooperation in countering the pandemic, equal and fair distribution of vaccines, free supplies of vaccines to the least developed countries and exchange of experience in countering the pandemic are the only way to put an end to it as soon as possible.

I sincerely congratulate the Government and people of Japan, as well as volunteers for the successful organisation of the 32nd Summer Olympics in these challenging times. Over 11,000 athletes from 206 countries took part in the Games, and this was a great experience in holding a major event in difficult epidemiological conditions.

I am pleased to note that this year we celebrate the centenary of diplomatic relations between Mongolia and Russia. We will continue to improve our comprehensive cooperation, which has a rich historical background, with all-round strategic partnership. This cooperation will contribute to sustainable regional development.

Our foreign policy priority is the steady development of friendly relations and cooperation with our two eternal neighbours – Russia and China. It is important to note that our partnership, based on friendship and a mutual understanding between nations, is developing and expanding in all areas despite the difficult COVID-19 situation.

From the very start, Mongolia has supported the Russian initiative on the Greater Eurasian Partnership and the Chinese One Belt One Road initiative. In the context of these undertakings, Mongolia is willing to take part in the infrastructure projects of our region and in the green development and environmental recovery programmes.

With a view to economic recovery, our country will rely on the long-term “Vision-2050” development programme that was endorsed by our parliament last year. Its priorities in terms of development include mining, processing and food industries, agriculture, power engineering, tourism, small and medium business, transport and logistics, creative production and information technology. We will be happy to cooperate with the Far East region and the Asia-Pacific countries in these areas.

Ladies and gentlemen,

Mongolia is a country with a unique geographic location that only borders two large countries: Russia and China. The trade and economic sector of Mongolia is connected with our two neighbours in the north and south, and we focus on economic relations and cooperation with these two countries.

Mongolia is among the 32 countries without access to the sea. This is why we want to use the advantage of our location between Asia and Europe to become a transport, trade and service hub, the transit Mongolia.

Mongolia, like the rest of the world, faced serious trade and economic difficulties due to the COVID-19 pandemic. However, the trend towards gradual economic recovery can be seen as of the first half of the year.

Before the pandemic, in 2017–2019, Mongolia’s gross domestic product grew six percent on average. Moreover, during this period, foreign trade was in surplus of $1–2 billion. The volume of foreign direct investment was stable, at the level of $2–3 billion. Debt management improved significantly; the credit rating rose; the volume of foreign exchange reserves increased to the proper level; the exchange rate stabilised; and favourable conditions were provided to hold inflation at the target level.

In 2020 and 2021, when global economic activities slowed down due to the pandemic, Mongolia’s economy faced serious challenges too. Mongolia carried out a countercyclical budgetary fiscal policy to overcome these difficulties, and adopted a programme aimed at countering the crisis to support the economy.

We also cooperate actively with other countries, foreign and domestic investors, entrepreneurs and multinational corporations. In particular, in addition to the mining industry, which is our main economic sector, we support exports-oriented enterprises and large projects in agriculture, energy and natural gas. The construction of an oil refinery is also underway.

The Far Eastern region is rich in natural resources and is becoming an important economic and trading centre in East Asia. Entrepreneurs and investors in many countries are interested in this region and invest in it.

Our country has opened a trade mission in Vladivostok to study the possibility of cooperation in this region and an expansion of economic activities. We hope this will make an important contribution to our further trade and economic cooperation. The trade mission’s activities are aimed at expanding trade and economic ties between Mongolia and the Far East and exporting our goods via sea routes to the markets of East and Southeast Asia, importing their goods, and attracting investment as well as holding regional marketing research.

Mongolia has always focused on expanding cooperation with the Eurasian Economic Union. Today we are exploring the possibility of signing a free trade agreement with the Eurasian Economic Union. We believe that such an agreement could play an important role in lifting trade barriers to foreign trade and ensuring our involvement in regional economic integration processes.

I would also like to mention the trilateral programme between Russia, Mongolia and China to create an economic corridor in the context of economic cooperation in the Far Eastern region. We are actively working with our neighbours to implement large projects like the renovation of the railway and car corridor, construction of new roads and railways, and building a gas pipeline from Russia to China via Mongolia as part of this programme. In particular, active work is underway to develop the technical and economic assessment of the project to build a gas pipeline passing through Mongolia, which will become the largest construction project in the Far East. The shortest roads and railways connecting Asia and Europe pass through Mongolia. This is why the increasing volume of trade between Russia and China, the creation of a trade, transport and logistic network between Asia and Europe and a transport flow using Mongolia’s convenient location, will reflect positively on regional cooperation.

Mongolia is consistently carrying out an open policy in order to simplify the conditions for trade and shipping, access to the sea and development of transit shipments. As part of this policy, we have launched major infrastructure projects, such as the construction of a new railroad network, the expansion of the road network, and the construction of a new international airport as well as a new regional transport and logistics centre.

Later on, it will be necessary to speed up works related to the economically viable strategic projects, such as the renovation of the Central Railway Corridor, which is included in the programme of creating an economic corridor between Mongolia, Russia and China; the construction of the Eastern Railway Corridor to connect the Trans-Baikal Territory and China through eastern Mongolia; the construction of the Western Railway Corridor to connect the Republic of Tyva and China through western Mongolia; and the construction of a high-speed road that will connect all three countries.

Mongolia is open to cooperation with you and to the implementation of these regional and national highly profitable development projects.

Ladies and gentlemen,

It is necessary to pay a great deal of attention to environmental issues and take drastic measures because environmental degradation is getting worse and extreme weather events occur more often, all of which might significantly harm the sustainable economic development of the countries and the habitat of mankind. The smoke from the wildfires in Yakutia has reached Mongolia’s capital, Ulaanbaatar, and even the Arctic Ocean. The sandstorms in Mongolia have reached not only China, Japan and Korea, but also the Pacific Ocean.

I think you will agree that, being neighbours, we need to cooperate at our regional level, hold joint projects and programmes to protect ourselves from natural disasters, preserve the environmental balance, and counteract climate change.

To meet the electricity requirements of Northeast Asian countries and increase the share of renewable energy in electricity generation it is necessary to develop trans-border connection points in the region. Mongolia has set itself the aim of fully meeting its domestic electric energy requirements and becoming an exporter country. In this context, Mongolia has initiated cooperation with other countries of the region on using renewable energy sources in the Gobi Desert and building hydropower plants in our country.

Such phenomena as migration, climate change, destruction of the environmental balance and mutation of microorganisms increase the risk of the transfer of diseases from animals to humans, the emergence of new diseases and an outbreak of the old ones. Nowadays, when the risk of cross-border spread of contagious diseases is growing, it is necessary to upgrade mechanisms for the exchange of experience and information as part of the efforts to expand regional cooperation. In turn, such cooperation will build our capacity to prevent pandemics in the future.

The strengthening of the healthcare system will create opportunities for ensuring economic growth and trade. In this context, I would like to ask the organisers and participants of the forum to pay attention to our proposal: to discuss biosecurity and regional cooperation in countering the pandemic at future events.

Ladies and gentlemen,

I wish success and all the best to every participant in the Eastern Economic Forum, which each year gives us a wonderful opportunity to exchange views on the development of the Asia-Pacific countries, their problems and cooperation. We have heard many new interesting business ideas here and we have tried to explain our views to you as well.

I would like to thank the Russian organisers of the forum and President of Russia Vladimir Putin for inviting us to attend it.

Thank you for your attention.

Sergei Brilyov: Thank you very much, Mr Khurelsukh.

Gazprom's project will soon be completed. I think the new Trans-Mongolian gas pipeline will be visible even from outer space. In the meantime, when you fly from the beautiful and very modern city of Ulan Bator in any direction, all you can see below is an endless steppe and enormous trails going in different directions which are used by the nomads. How did you organise your vaccination programme? Did you go out into the steppe? Or did people come to you to get vaccinated? In general, are Mongols getting their jabs?

Ukhnaagiin Khurelsukh: The vaccination programme is being successfully conducted in our country. Our Ministry of Healthcare has registered seven vaccines that can be used in an emergency. The effectiveness of the vaccines and the importance of getting it are very well understood by our people, and they are willing to get the vaccine.

The vaccination campaign began in February 2021. Today, about 90 percent of the target population, in other words, 68 percent of the total population, have been vaccinated. It was a very effective campaign with good results.

About 2 percent (statistical data) of those who received the vaccine are falling ill, which shows the high effectiveness of the vaccines that are being used in our country. We are using the Chinese-made vaccine Vero Cell, AstraZeneca, Sputnik V and Pfizer. They also show very good results. In the future, on the recommendation of the WHO, we will look into vaccinating children aged 3 to 17.

The biggest challenge is boosting our people’s trust in the vaccine. This is a common problem not only in our country, but around the world. So, we must work on the international recognition of vaccination.

Sergei Brilyov: Ninety percent coverage is quite an accomplishment. It appears that the world has split into two leagues: the countries that produce vaccines and struggle to convince people to get vaccinated and the countries that do not produce vaccines, but their people can’t wait to get one.

Mr Putin, this is a random conversation, so to speak. I had a very strange and interesting trip before I came to Vladivostok. Several weeks before Vladivostok, I was in Uruguay. We were shooting a film there. To draw a historical parallel, what they have there is a main continental yellow fever quarantine. They do not produce a vaccine and the people line up to get vaccinated. By the way, I think it is the only country in the world where you are considered vaccinated (I know this from my own experience) if you got vaccinated with a vaccine that is legal in the country of your permanent residence. That is, this topic is not politicised at all. So, if you live in Russia and were vaccinated by Sputnik in Russia, you are welcome. Perhaps, we can bring this matter up a little later.

Now I would like to give the floor to the President of the country that is producing its own vaccine and has already vaccinated 883 million people. Obviously, this is the People’s Republic of China (PRC). But also, before giving the floor to President Xi Jinping, I would like to draw your attention to news that was made in the past 24 hours. China announced that despite the pandemic, or, to be more exact, having largely overcome the pandemic, it is opening its Beijing stock exchange in addition to what it already has in Shanghai and Hong Kong. We can only congratulate the Chinese on this occasion.

Let us see what kind of video address President of China Xi Jinping has prepared for the current Eastern Economic Forum.

President of the People’s Republic of China Xi Jinping (retranslated): President Putin, ladies and gentlemen, friends,

I am grateful to President Putin for his kind invitation. I am very glad to take part in the Eastern Economic Forum again for the first time in three years. Today is victory day in the war against Japan and the 76th anniversary of the end of World War II.

On August 25, I spoke to President Putin over the phone. During this conversation, we both expressed the need to preserve the firm commitment of the international community to upholding the results of World War II. We emphasised the importance of defending historical truth and drawing lessons from the past in the name of the future.

Last June, President Putin and I announced together via video conference our decision to extend the Treaty on Neighbourly Relations, Friendship and Cooperation between the PRC and the RF. We reached new agreements on a number of important issues, including the promotion of Russia-China strategic partnership and comprehensive practical cooperation.

In this new era, the comprehensive partnership and strategic cooperation of Russia and China are demonstrating powerful dynamics and huge potential.

The international context is undergoing profound changes today. The coronavirus situation is far from stabilised and the recovery of the global economy is still sluggish.

Regional cooperation in Northeast Asia is facing serious challenges, but there are also unique opportunities We should be guided by development trends both in the region and all over the world, and work together for the sake of broad-based development during this difficult period.

We must support each other’s pandemic response, increase cooperation in developing and producing vaccines as a global public good, fight attempts to politicise the issue of vaccines and the origin of the coronavirus, and jointly try to create a community of shared healthcare for all of humanity.

We must always promote efforts towards mutually beneficial cooperation, including by uniting the Belt and Road Initiative and the EAEU. We must support the innovative development of the digital economy, respond together to the changing global climate, and promote the socioeconomic development of the region.

We should join ranks to support peace and stability in the region, overcome points of contention, promote understanding through dialogue and consultation, and make real the concept of general, comprehensive, joint sustainable security in order to build a common home with harmony and tranquility.

This year China marks the 100th anniversary of the Chinese Communist Party. Our country has embarked on a new approach to fully building a modernised socialist state. We are ready to move towards our goal of creating the Community with Shared Future together will all our partners in the spirit of true multilateralism, mutual trust, friendship and mutually beneficial cooperation.

Thank you for your attention.

Sergei Brilyov: A very substantive speech from the President of China, thanks to which we continue to accumulate topics for our discussion.

The President touched on security, as did the President of Kazakhstan. I suggest taking our time with this topic because we will probably hear more on it from others speakers yet to come.

But now I would like to remind you about last week’s events, when a joint investigation of the US intelligence community was released that said there was no proof the coronavirus had originated in a Chinese laboratory, at a Chinese market in Wuhan or from aliens (that really is one of the versions out there). President Putin, does it matter to you where this virus came from?

Vladimir Putin:We must always understand the reasons behind any phenomenon, that is the right thing to do; but it is wrong to politicise all of this.

Sergei Brilyov: Like your Chinese counterpart has said.

Vladimir Putin: Yes, of course. When things start to get politicised, it erodes trust in the conclusions drawn based on a politicised approach, because there is a feeling that we are far from the truth. All these investigations should be based on objective information. It is good that the US intelligence agencies have come to that conclusion, but it would have been better to do so earlier. And it is even more important, in my view, to fight to overcome the pandemic and its impact together, without political bias. This is critical for all humankind.

In this context, I would like to note one thing. Those who politicise are making colossal, and I would say catastrophic, mistakes in combatting the pandemic. What do I mean? After all, first, the vaccination opportunities are mainly concentrated in highly developed economies, where the bulk of vaccines are produced, and vaccination is aimed at protecting their own population. Very little is done, and I mean very little, to protect humankind more broadly. And this is bad for the producers. Why? Because it is boomeranging around the Earth all the time. For example, Africa has the lowest level of protection and vaccination, and while there are contacts with African countries, there is no escaping the virus. This disease will constantly reemerge from there. This is what I wanted to say first.

Second, there are humanitarian things. All the time, we hear from our colleagues from the West that it is necessary to humanise international relations. And where is this humanisation? It is not seen in lifting pandemic-related restrictions, at least in the sphere of distributing medicines, such as vaccines, and helping countries in need. For example, Iran. I do not want to go into details on policy, but the country needs help and no restrictions are being lifted, not a single one. It has not even been discussed. Not to mention other countries. Take Venezuela. Policy is one thing, and humanitarian aid is another. You have to be consistent if you want to be trusted.

The same thing is true for the economy. The economy is recovering faster in the countries using financial tools associated with pumping in cash and deficit spending than in other regions of the world. It would be wise to help developing economies. But nothing is done yet. Look at the level of deficits in the world’s leading economies: they have skyrocketed. By what means? By inflating the economy. As a result, they are recovering faster. What is needed is to think about all participants in economic activities. This is what lacks so far. So politicisation of these issues will not yield anything positive, only working together will.

Sergei Brilyov: Let us look into it. There is a reason why I mentioned my trip to Latin America. I visited with the Secretary General of the Latin American Integration Association, which, indeed, unites all countries. I asked him directly (I have it on record and I will show it on air): “Have you ever had Russians come to you with a vaccine – they say Russians are carrying out some kind of vaccine diplomacy – and ask you to do something in return?” His answer was a resounding no.

I would like to double-check this with your colleagues from Kazakhstan and Mongolia. When a small, peace-loving northern nation called Russia came to Kazakhstan and Mongolia with Sputnik V, did the Russians set any preconditions for you?

Kassym-Jomart Tokayev: There were no preconditions, of course. We have agreed that we will purchase Sputnik V and, as I just mentioned in my remarks, an agreement was reached on producing the Russian-made Sputnik V vaccine at an enterprise in Karaganda. I think this is an important agreement.

Since I was vaccinated with Sputnik V, I believe this vaccine is quite effective. And it is surprising that it still has not been internationally certified. However, as far as I know, the WHO has certain requirements, about 26 of them. Clearly, you need to comply in order to be licensed or certified. In any case, Sputnik V is de facto recognised all over the world, I think, with over 60 countries already using this vaccine. So, this vaccine’s reputation was not affected, I believe.

Sergei Brilyov: What do our Mongolian friends have to say? Maybe the Russians came to see them hiding Sputnik in their jacket, saying the gas pipeline needs to follow a different route or they should buy something from Russians?

Ukhnaa Khurelsukh: The situation in our country is similar.

Sergei Brilyov: We have lost the translation, have we not?

Do you want me to repeat my question? What do our Mongolian friends have to say to this? When the Russians came with their vaccines, did they put up any preconditions or, perhaps, ask for a different gas pipeline route?

Ukhnaa Khurelsukh: There was absolutely no such thing. On the contrary, the Russian Government and the Russian people supported us in a big way. Our citizens get vaccinated of their own accord. We have vaccines made in China, AstraZeneca, and the Russian vaccine, as I mentioned in my remarks.

President Putin, I would like to take this opportunity and to express my gratitude for the fact that the Russian Federation provided us with timely support. Supply of the vaccine has played an important role in improving the COVID situation in our country.

Sergei Brilyov: Thank you very much.

Let us see who is next on the list. Today, we really have many participants; not all of them will necessarily be online, many have sent video messages.

Now it is the turn of the Indian Prime Minster, Mr Modi, to speak. Let us hear from him now.

Prime Minister of the Republic of India Narendra Modi: President of the Russian Federation,My dear friend President Putin, Excellences, Participants of the Eastern Economic Forum, Namaskar!

I am delighted to address the Eastern Economic Forum and thank President Putin for this honour.

Friends, In Indian history and civilisation the word ‘Sangam’ has a special meaning. It means confluence or coming together of rivers, people or ideas. In my view, Vladivostok is truly a ‘Sangam’ of Eurasia and the Pacific.

I applaud President Putin’s vision for the development of the Russian Far East. India will be a reliable partner for Russia in realizing this vision.

In 2019 when I had visited Vladivostok to attend the forum I had announced India’s commitment to an “Act Far East” policy. This policy is an important part of our special and privileged strategic partnership with Russia.

Your Excellency President Putin,

I remember our detailed conversation during the boat ride from Vladivostok to Zvezda during my visit in 2019. You had shown me the modern shipbuilding facility at Zvezda and had expressed the hope that India would participate in this great enterprise. Today I am delighted that one of India’s biggest shipyards, Mazagon Docks Limited, will partner with Zvezda for construction of some of the most important commercial ships in the world. India and Russia are partners in space exploration through the Gaganyaan programme. India and Russia will also be partners in opening the Northern Sea Route for international trade and commerce.

Friends,

The friendship between India and Russia has stood the test of time. Most recently it was seen in our robust cooperation during the Covid-19 pandemic including in the area of vaccines. The pandemic has highlighted the importance of the health and pharma sectors in our bilateral cooperation.

Energy is another major pillar of our strategic partnership. India–Russia energy partnership can help bring stability to the global energy market. Minister of Petroleum & Natural Gas Mr Hardeep Puri is in Vladivostok to represent India at this forum.

Indian workers are participating in major gas projects in the Amur Region, from Yamal to Vladivostok and onward to Chennai. We envisage an energy and trade bridge.

I am happy that the Chennai – Vladivostok Maritime Corridor is making headway. This connectivity project along with the International North-South Corridor will bring India and Russia physically closer to each other.

Despite the pandemic-related restrictions there has been good progress in strengthening our business links in many areas. This includes long-term supply of coking coal to the Indian steel industry.

We are also exploring new opportunities in agro industry, ceramics, strategic and rare earth minerals and diamonds. I am happy that diamond representatives from Sakha-Yakutia and Gujarat are having a separate interaction as part of this forum. I am confident that the 1 billion dollar soft credit line announced in 2019 will create many business opportunities between both countries.

It is very good that we have brought together the key players, the main stakeholders from the regions of the Russian Far East and the corresponding states of India. They all got together on one platform. We certainly look forward to continuing our productive discussions that began back in 2019 during the visit of key ministers from India and Indian states. I would also like to extend an invitation to the governors of 11 regions in the Far Eastern Federal District to visit India at their earliest convenience.

Friends, like I said, in 2019, at this very forum, Indian specialists were instrumental in promoting the development of many resource-intensive regions around the world. India is rich in talent and specialists. And the Far East is undoubtedly very rich in resources. So, I see here great potential for cooperation, including for Indian specialists, who can make a serious contribution to the development of the Far Eastern Federal District.

Far Eastern Federal University, the venue for this forum, is also home to an ever-growing number of Indian students.

President Putin, thank you once again for the opportunity to speak at this forum. You have always been a great friend of India. It is under your leadership that our strategic partnership continues to grow and gain strength.

I wish every success to all the participants of the Eastern Economic Forum.

Thank you very much.

Sergei Brilyov: Mr President, you visited the Admiral Nevelskoy Maritime State University the day before yesterday.

Vladimir Putin: I visited the university’s training centre.

Sergei Brilyov: Well, you made one remark, even a couple of times, that those who have nothing to do geographically with the Northern Sea Route (NSR) are still trying to get involved with it. And the Prime Minister of India, a southern country, is talking about the NSR as something that goes without saying. Did you have him in mind or were you referring to someone else?

Vladimir Putin: You should have paid attention to the rest of this remark. I said that we welcomed such interest. It is important to remember that we are following the developments in other countries (India is not one of them) that are concerned about Russia actively developing the NSR. They are assuming that we are planning to restrict certain countries. Such assumptions are divorced from reality.

We will not restrict anyone. Moreover, we want this work to strictly conform to the international law of the sea – the 1982 Convention and another document on the Arctic, if I am correct. We adhere to these fundamental documents and intend to do so in the future.

We are fine with this. We are happy to point out that the most economically beneficial and safe NSR passage is through Russian territorial waters, our internal seas. What objections could we have to this? We are fine with it. And the more this routing is used by all interested parties, the better.

We welcome interest from India, China, and other Asian and European countries in this cooperation. I believe we will repeatedly return to this issue in the Arctic Council, which I mentioned and that we are currently chairing.

During the meeting with President Joe Biden in Geneva, we discussed this issue in detail. Maybe not quite in detail but we paid much attention to it. I hope all our partners from Canada, Denmark and other countries will display interest in this and that all of them will be willing to cooperate in the process rather than seek yet another venue for dispute and confrontation.

Sergei Brilyov: I would like to draw your attention to one curious nuance. The President of Kazakhstan spoke about the Asia-Pacific region, which is the usual term for us. The President of Mongolia called it the Asia-Pacific region, but the Indian Prime Minister has now used a new term: the Indo-Pacific region. But we can talk about this later, during the discussion of security issues.

In the meantime, let’s listen to another leader who sent his video address today. This is Prime Minister of Thailand Prayut Chan-o-cha.

(The video address by Prime Minister of Thailand Prayut Chan-o-cha will be published later.)

Sergei Brilyov: Mr President, will you go to the APEC Summit in Thailand?

Vladimir Putin: If it takes place in the usual format.

Sergei Brilyov: What about the APEC Summit in Brunei? Mr President, it will take place in November 2024. Will you go yourself or send someone instead?

Vladimir Putin: We will have to wait and see. First, we must live to see 2024. As you know, pandemics are surrounding us on all sides. So, we must keep working rather than think about such major international events that will take place in a few years.

Sergei Brilyov: But there will also be one domestic event – the presidential election.

Vladimir Putin: I know, I know. This is why I am saying that we must live calmly to see this time.

Sergei Brilyov: Can you say a bit more about the future?

Will you be sorry to see Sergei Shoigu and Sergei Lavrov go to the State Duma?

Vladimir Putin: Yes, I will. They work well in their positions.

My colleagues just asked if they could head the list, demonstrating that everything the United Russia party is doing is actually put into action, including through the efforts of these people.

Sergei Brilyov: However, as far as I understand, the decision will be taken in September, after the elections?

Vladimir Putin: They are the ones to take the decision. Ultimately is it for them to decide.

Sergei Brilyov: While we are on the topic of the future.

What do you think, will the President of Ukraine come to Vladivostok to this forum or to St Petersburg one day?

Vladimir Putin: Why not? Certainly. I fully expect it because I think that the current situation is absolutely abnormal and unnatural, and sooner or later – and preferably sooner, the sooner the better – we will fully restore our relations with Ukraine.

Sergei Brilyov: You know, maybe I watched the wrong broadcasts, although I kept a fairly close eye on it, but on the day that President Zelensky was in Washington the news coverage of my colleagues, for example from the BBC World Service (on television), looked as follows: obligatory Afghanistan, abortion in Texas and the flood in Spain. And that visit was non-existent. I have a feeling that we in Russia pay somewhat more attention to that than the host party. Nevertheless, you said the President of Ukraine will perhaps come in the future. And what about President Zelensky specifically? Do you think it is possible?

Vladimir Putin: It depends not on Russia but on the Ukrainian people and the voters in Ukraine. They should assess the level, the quality and the results of the work done by those whom they voted for. And if President Zelensky is elected and pursues his policy of normalising relations with Russia, not in words but in deeds, then why not? Of course, yes.

Alas, in reality it is just the opposite. In reality, this is not the first generation of Ukrainian politicians that has come to power with slogans of restoring relations with Russia and resolving all the issues that accumulated over the previous years and later shamelessly deceived their voters and radically reoriented their actual policy. This happens under the pressure of extreme nationalists. It looks like newly elected leaders, after they enter high office, begin to fear that part of Ukrainian society and do everything to satisfy their ambitions. The results of this we can see in the economic and social conditions in Ukraine.

Sergei Brilyov: Then let us talk about the past, since we are having this lightning round.

Mr President, what are the hypotheses about Malyuta Skuratov? Let me remind everyone you that you met with the Governor of Tver the other day who said that he would build a church on the site where, according to legend, Malyuta Skuratov strangled Metropolitan Philip who, in turn, allegedly refused to bestow a blessing upon the “oprichnina”. You say it is just one hypothesis. What are the others?

Vladimir Putin: Well, the second hypothesis is simple. He did not kill him and did not pass by that place. And if he did pass by, he did not stop.

With regard to building a church, especially given the occasion, I think it is absolutely necessary to receive the blessing of Patriarch Kirill of Moscow and All Russia before doing so.

Sergei Brilyov: A follow-up about the future, after which we will return to our general agenda.

I would ask our foreign guests to forgive me, I have a couple of questions which the interpreters might find challenging to translate, because the context here is purely Russian.

Let me check what his name is, I wrote it down for myself. What kind of future awaits Nikanor Tolstykh, Mr President?

Vladimir Putin: Who is he?

Sergei Brilyov: He is the boy who corrected you at the Okean Centre.

Vladimir Putin: About what?

Sergei Brilyov: You misspoke and said Seven Years’ War instead of Northern War. He corrected you. An absolutely normal situation. You have no idea of the storm that followed. The future of this boy is practically dangling by a thread. “How dare he say that to the President?” Seriously.

Vladimir Putin: Frankly, I know nothing about it.

Sergei Brilyov: This is the big news of the last 48 hours, the internet is buzzing.

Vladimir Putin: You don’t say!

I was dealing with the day’s work and getting ready for today’s event and holding other events. Frankly, I did not even know that, so I am not ready …

Sergei Brilyov: That is, it did not hurt your feelings, and the boy did nothing wrong?

Vladimir Putin: Why should that bother me? On the contrary, it can only please me. Young people know the history of their Fatherland well. It is great, and I am pleased to know that.

As for (now I understand what you are talking about) the Seven Years’ War or the Twenty Years’ War. In fact, it began in 1700, after Peter the Great joined the alliance of countries organised, among others, by Frederick II, the Saxon-Polish king, who, by the way, later slightly revised the originally stated goals. The Battle of Poltava took place, if my memory serves, in the late autumn of 1709. This was a watershed, after which everything started going Russia’s way and in favour of Russia. So, it was not seven years, it was eight and a half years, after all. The Battle of Narva (1700), where Russia was defeated, took place in the spring, if I am not mistaken, and the Battle of Poltava was in late autumn. So it took eight and a half years. We can safely assume that everything was done during these eight years, not seven, but eight.

It does not matter to me whatsoever. Your question caught me off guard and I find it strange, but there was something that made me call this war the Seven Years’ War, although, of course, it formally ended in 1721. It is great and we can only rejoice knowing that the Okean Centre has brought together knowledgeable schoolchildren and, importantly, that they freely speak their mind in the moment. Listen, this should tell us that Russia’s future is in good hands.

Sergei Brilyov: Mr President, to move on to the next subject, I must reintroduce myself. A year and a half ago I was invited to revive the Global Energy prize in parallel with my work. I have become a little more skilled on these issues and so I was a bit concerned today when you started talking about green hydrogen. I am not sure that even all those here know what that is: green hydrogen means hydrogen from the air. So, you take solar batteries and windmills and convert their energy into electricity. Electrolysis produces hydrogen (everyone knows this process at the secondary school level). You burn hydrogen without producing CO2 emissions. This sounds great.

You said it was necessary to calculate everything. But calculations show that a tonne of green hydrogen costs from 3.5 to 6 times more than blue hydrogen, which can be produced from natural gas (Mr Alexei Miller is across from us). Or compare this with other coloured hydrogens that can be produced from coal. I see that Kuzbass Governor Sergei Tsivilev is also here.

What am I driving at? It is very important to reduce carbon dioxide emissions. Nobody argues that since climate change is obvious. Your colleague from Mongolia even talked about desertification, which is spreading to Russian territory. If the permafrost starts melting even more, things will get much worse. But it seems that the idea that a universal transition to green technology is a panacea is not devoid of hypocrisy. There is technology for intercepting CO2 and pumping it into hollow oil layers. Incidentally, this technology was developed in the West rather than Russia. So, this is not a Russian conspiracy. Is it possible at all to discuss this issue rationally? Sometimes there is the feeling that this discussion is prompted not by concern for nature but a desire to receive subsidies for technology that is still several times more expensive, though it will probably become less expensive in the future.

Vladimir Putin: Yes, there is this feeling sometimes. I think your apprehensions are based on certain grounds. Part of the reason is that some economies and some countries want to deprive others of their competitive advantages. This is why the European Union is talking about a kind of environmental tax, if I can put it that way. Of course, we are interested in cooperation on preserving nature and preventing this disastrous climate change. That said we do not accept the suggested rules that obviously contradict WTO standards. So, we are following these discussions closely and will cooperate with our partners in all regions, including the EU.

We understand that for now this is not a consensus position. Government experts in many leading EU countries realise that the declared initial approach is unfair and does not conform to international legal standards. Let me repeat that we will work very carefully with everyone. Unfortunately, this very important goal of countering climate change is often used to pursue some current economic goals. It reflects a striving to reshape the energy market. Many countries are using it in their domestic political agenda.

We have just heard about the nuclear power industry development. Do nuclear power plants produce any emissions? No, they do not. Some of our colleagues in our partner countries even suggest that the nuclear power industry capabilities should not be included in the calculations related to environmental well-being, along with the hydroelectric power industry. Nuclear and hydroelectric energy industries comprise up to 40 percent of Russia’s power generation nationwide, which is a substantial figure. We have to follow the development of technologies closely.

As you said, we can produce hydrogen from natural gas or coal, but today this process is expensive. You have mentioned that green hydrogen is 7 or even 8 times more expensive…

Sergei Brilyov: From 3.5 to 6 times, and more.

Vladimir Putin: All right, let’s say six times. But technology is advancing. Today it is six times more expensive but tomorrow it may be six times less expensive, so we have to follow this closely. If you ask our experts or Government representatives involved in this, we have the Energy Minister present here – I cannot see Deputy Prime Minister Novak, is he here? We discuss all these issues with him on a regular basis and in detail. Not only do we follow what is taking place globally in this sector, but we also take the necessary efforts to avoid lagging behind and to maintain our leadership positions in the energy sector in general and the energy industry of the future, in particular.

Sergei Brilyov: Now I might get told off by the founders of the Global Energy Prize, who are present here: Rosseti, Gazprom, Surgutneftegaz (cannot see them but they are probably here), and RusHydro, which became a founder this year. The winners will be announced next week. Over this year, the number of candidates has grown threefold, with 106 nominees representing 36 countries against last year’s 36 representing 12 countries.

After these efforts were expanded, we were able to take a broader look at what is happening, the trends and ideas. Although the winners will be announced next week in Kazan, I would like to name the person who won in the Traditional Energy category: Zinfer Ismagilov, a Russian winner for the first time in many years, and he works on the issues of the coal industry. Actually, it is true – what costs six times more today may cost six times less later, but I believe it is too early to give up on traditional energy resources.

The President of Kazakhstan was the first to mention this issue today. Kazakhstan is a major oil and gas exporter, and Mongolia is one of the largest coal exporters. Obviously, the renewable energy sector will grow, with a shrinking demand for hydrocarbons – although they are still required for petrochemistry. But what is the solution? The President of Kazakhstan has mentioned a general approach. What could such a joint approach of oil-producing countries be?

Kassym-Jomart Tokayev: As for Kazakhstan, coal amounts to over 70 percent in our energy balance. This is why we are interested in clean technology.

I agree with the opinion that technology is making headway. Indeed, what looks very expensive today may become cheap tomorrow. This is why it is very important not to miss the moment. In other words, we must focus on developing technology and borrow successful experience from abroad.

Look at China, for example. In the 15th century, its share of the global economy was 60 percent. There is a reason why it was called the Middle Kingdom and the Celestial Empire. China controlled an overwhelming part of the world economy. However, later it missed the technological revolution in the West, in particular, in England, and became an object of aggression of the then great powers. After two opium wars it became a colony of England, France and other powers. Why is China focusing on technological development today? Because it has learned the lessons of the past, the lessons of history.

I think we must also derive some lessons because we cannot afford to rest on our laurels. Yes, we are fortunate to have traditional energy sources, such as oil, gas and coal, but it looks like the world is undergoing a transformation. I agree that it is possible and necessary to argue about the extent to which various new international taxes conform to the WTO rules. In this respect, we could adopt a consolidated position and closely cooperate in transforming our economies.

I think that Kazakhstan announced a rational enough strategy of achieving carbon neutrality by 2060. This period is long enough to allow us to modernise all relevant equipment and switch to new technology. Only God knows what will happen in 30 years but God helps those who help themselves. This is why we must work very hard.

Of course, I agree that all issues linked with the future of our economies must not be politicised. Excessive politicisation usually leads to the loss of an objective approach and makes every idea biased, and this is very dangerous for national security. This is why I believe that Kazakhstan, as well as other countries, must cooperate actively first with its closest, natural partners and stay on trend, to use the current expression. To be honest, I do not like English words and do not use them often but some of them are up to date should be used sometimes.

Thank you.

Sergei Brilyov: What about Mongolia? Well, first, I hope that the fate of gas transit in Mongolia will be happier than in Ukraine.

It is interesting still – will Mongolia take the gas by agreement from the pipeline that will run from Russia to China? Will you switch to gas under the circumstances that we are discussing? Are you going to develop, say, solar power? What are your plans?

Ukhnaagiin Khürelsükh: The gas pipeline which connects Russia and China and which will run across Mongolia is a mega-project of our three countries. Research work is underway. We are working on establishing an economic corridor, which would make its contribution to the green development of our countries.

The changing climate and ecosystems are our common problem. I think this is not a problem of any individual country but a global problem. Today, the coronavirus pandemic is yet more proof that we have mistreated nature and the ecosystem. It is my personal opinion. This is why the development of the renewable electric energy sector is a priority for our country’s economy. We have ample opportunities for all this as well as great potential for developing wind and solar energy production. For this reason, our plans are to raise the level of renewable energy production to 20 percent of the total by 2025, and reach 30 percent by 2030. It is also very important to have interdependence and interaction for energy sector cooperation in North-East Asia.

In addition to the electricity produced by solar and wind sources, we have set ourselves the objective of working in this area with other countries and increasing the share of such clean energy in the total amount of energy produced in our country.

We also think that the gas pipeline which we talked about provides a great opportunity for our country to join gas infrastructure development and will make an important contribution to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in our country and improve environmental conditions. Mongolia accounts for mere 0.1 percent of the world greenhouse gas emissions; nevertheless, we pay much attention to this issue.

Protecting the Earth is our common goal and job, as well as the purpose of our cooperation. For example, the programme 100,000 Solar Yurts has been implemented in Mongolia since 2005. This programme supplies nomad families with energy; 100,000 nomad families use mobile wind and solar arrays. It is of great importance for preserving the ecosystem in our country.

Thank you.

Sergey Brilyov: Thank you very much.

I would like to conclude the discussion of this topic by giving you more specific examples. An agreement on the Udokanskoye [copper] deposit was signed before our session began. The President of Kazakhstan has just mentioned the Baimskoye deposit, which will be developed in Chukotka, drawing on the experience acquired in Kazakhstan. This is a copper deposit, as many of you know. It was discovered in 1972 but in the 1980s it was deemed unfeasible to develop because of the marshlands and because navigation in the area is possible for only two months a year.

Now an essentially new stage kicks off, with a road being built from Chukotka to Yakutia to address the issue of delivering supplies to that part of the country. This includes driverless dumpers running on low-carbon technology and the like.

However, I do not want to steal the show from Mr Tokayev, who can tell us all about it. In September, a similar project will be launched in Kazakhstan and this plan will be largely brought to perfection. That is, a traditional industry, in this case the construction of an integrated ore-processing plant, could be based on a totally different environmental platform and totally different environmental standards. Is that right?

Kassym-Jomart Tokayev: Exactly. In September, a new integrated plant will open at the Aktogay deposit. I plan to attend this major event, which is of great importance for Kazakhstan.

As for the Baimsky Ore-Processing Plant, I want to inform the audience that a Kazakh company, KAZ Minerals, bought the deposit for $900 million. By 2028, investment will increase to $8 billion.

This deposit appears to be a feasible project now, while previously it was seen as unprofitable. Why has it become attractive? Because altogether new technologies are either being planned or already being used in the project. I will not go into detail right now but I would like to note that all digitisation methods are being employed. Seventy driverless trucks or dumpers with a carrying capacity of 350 tonnes are used there, as well as drones to ensure the plant’s security. The same technology will be used at the Aktogay deposit in Kazakhstan.

I believe this is an example of very successful cooperation between Russia and Kazakhstan. So, we are pining great hopes on the Baimskoye deposit. Of course, we are determined to develop our Aktogay deposit.

Sergey Brilyov: It all fits together perfectly: the owner of KAZ Minerals is Russian, so it looks like it has a common Eurasian home – that is great.

Mr President, this all sounds great and very optimistic, but still there are issues you have mentioned, with ongoing depopulation and people leaving the Far East. How can we keep people here?

Vladimir Putin: This is not a sharp increase – just the opposite, the depopulation and outflow have decreased.

Sergei Brilyov: But people keep leaving the region.

Vladimir Putin: They do, but once again, the outflow has slowed down. And in certain sectors, where good enterprises are set up, we can even see an inflow – such as the Zvezda shipyard, which has a shortage of specialists.

Sergei Brilyov: This shipbuilding complex is in Bolshoi Kamen, just across the Amur Bay from here.

Vladimir Putin: Exactly. It has a shortage of specialists and they are coming here from other Russian regions. This is how it should be done – we need such projects to attract people by providing them with good, interesting and financially rewarding work that offers great prospects, instead of slogans. This is the aim of the Eastern Economic Forum – to seek and implement such projects.

Sergei Brilyov: By the way, those who are staying on the Far Eastern Federal University campus, if your room is high up and your windows overlook the sea, you can clearly see the Zvezda shipyard from here across the bay.

Vladimir Putin: I would like to say that we never had such dry docks like the one that has been built here, not even during the Soviet era. Even the Soviet Union could not boast such shipbuilding achievements, but Russia can now, and hopefully, this will advance further.

In addition, as I mentioned in my introductory remarks, we must create favourable living conditions for people. This work should be done in parallel, and the government must certainly play its role, and a crucial role at that – in housing construction, healthcare, education, and a whole scope of social measures that are already underway, and we will boost these efforts further. I have mentioned some of them earlier.

Sergei Brilyov: Let me ask you a difficult question – at least it is difficult for me, something that I find hard to understand. As I have mentioned, I travel a lot across the Russian Far East, and I have visited many places here, including newly built production facilities. And there is an obvious contrast. For example, when I toured SUEK’s coal export terminal in Vanino (here I am just stating a fact, not trying to promote anything), I saw a 21st century facility: I remember I walked around in white slacks and there was no coal dust. I saw amazing production facilities, workers dressed in smart corporate uniforms, and the menu offered three or four choices for each course. But as soon as you leave these facilities, you see a totally different world. And this is often the case in our Far East: immense efforts at the federal level, federal or private finances, and work to create new production facilities. But what exactly causes this contrast? Does it depend to a greater extent on the efforts of the municipal authorities, or federal ones? How can it be explained?

Vladimir Putin: No, I do not think we can blame the municipal authorities for everything because their financial resources are limited. We will soon have to go back to the issue of distributing government resources at various governance levels – federal, regional and municipal. In fact, the entire Russian Far East used to be a closed territory, and Vladivostok was a closed city just a short while ago. So, there is a lot left from the Soviet legacy, when the social sector stood idle (and I have mentioned this), while residential areas – not the towns and villages, but residential buildings – were erected around enterprises. This process went on for decades, and there is nothing we can do about it now. It is the legacy we have inherited.

Do we have the right to throw stones at our predecessors? Look, people used to work in the most difficult conditions and yet they implemented tremendously challenging tasks.

Sergei Brilyov: And most importantly, they worked fast. Vladivostok is a young city, after all.

Vladimir Putin: True, they worked fast. But this is not just about Vladivostok, or other cities, towns or villages. We only have to thank those people for what they managed to achieve under such hard conditions and with such limited resources. It is true, today we must make use of what we have and advance through utilising a new industrial, technological and scientific basis to address the new tasks that the entire region and the country are facing.

I have also mentioned the need to modernise towns and villages in the Far East. Frankly, I even drew up a list of these towns and villages. I did not mention this because first we need to initiate and implement this work, and only then can we talk about it. But I spoke about what we are planning to do. I have the list of these villages and towns; I mentioned only two of them and they are in a poor condition and deserve much better – especially since their residents include people who were involved in the Baikal-Amur Mainline construction. We are now starting the renovation of this major Russian transport artery. So we have to take every effort in this regard and work on the whole complex of tasks.

Representatives of the business community should influence the situation in the communities where they are operating (which they are efficiently doing already), while the government should take the necessary efforts to improve the external situation and provide for a better social environment. I have mentioned these sectors: residential construction, healthcare, education, and others.

Sergei Brilyov: Is this feasible?

Vladimir Putin: This is a challenging, comprehensive and strategic yet achievable task, and efficient efforts of the past several years only prove that we are on the right track.

Sergei Brilyov: I would like to set another Far Eastern topic aside for the very end of our discussion, and to devote the concluding part of the meeting to an issue which we have touched upon and which cannot be ignored: developments in Afghanistan and their consequences.

Mr President, at the very beginning you said you were not going to concentrate on it too much. And this is what others have done, including those outside Russia. For instance, I was astonished to see a headline in the Daily Telegraph that said the western hegemony has come to an end. I was also surprised by the material sent to me last week by my friends from the European Centre for Foreign Policy, a noncommercial nongovernmental organisation, which wrote that the United States is becoming a ‘normal country’ – meaning it is abandoning the function of the world’s policeman.

Mr President, if the US ceases – or is ceasing – to be such a global policeman, who then will be responsible for global order?

Vladimir Putin: This is the responsibility of the United Nations and its Security Council, including its five permanent members.

But, you know, this is a very good opportunity for some to rant about the events in Afghanistan as well as about US policy. This is a catastrophe, it’s true – and these are not my words, this is what American analysts are saying. It is a catastrophe, because the Americans, a highly pragmatic nation, spent over $1.5 trillion on the campaign over these years – but received zero result. And if we look at the number of people left in Afghanistan who worked for the collective West – the United States and its allies – this is a humanitarian catastrophe as well.

Hopefully, a realisation will come that actions based on previous stances, which aimed to ‘civilise’ other nations and bring to them elements of the modern civilisation in line with ideas and concepts of those who impose them, is a misguided policy.

Actually, as to Afghanistan, I have heard many of our colleagues saying, “This was a mistake, we made the wrong choice, and we should not do so in the future.” But this has been a typical policy since the so-called enlightenment missions of Catholic priests, who arrived, say, in Asian countries or China and ‘civilised’ the local residents, based on some achievements in natural sciences, education and medicine, but the main goal was to promote Catholicism rather than educate people.

There are hardly any changes. However, it is not a spiritual or economic colonisation going on but rather attempts to maintain their influence under the pretext of promoting democracy. Meanwhile, if a certain nation needs democracy, people will arrive at it by themselves, it shouldn’t be imposed on them by violent means.

At the same time from the point of view of technology, if we try to understand the developments, the Soviet troops also withdrew but they did it in an organised manner. This is number one.

Second. The regime that remains in that country existed for several years after the Soviet troop withdrawal. It is unclear how the situation in Afghanistan would have unfolded if the Soviet Union had not stopped rendering at least the economic assistance before the Soviet Union broke up. Chances are the parties to the conflict could have come to some agreement.

But how are the Americans withdrawing? Via airlifts. Whereas the Soviet troops marched towards their border. It is a different story. And it was easier for the USSR in this respect, of course.

Is this the end of some Western hegemony? You see, the point is that these lessons – and there are lessons – should be understood correctly and adjustments should be made to real politics. They say about Afghanistan, “We got there, we made a lot of mistakes there”, whereas the same is going on with regard to other nations. What are sanctions? It is the continuation of the same policy of imposing their standards. Russia is not the point. The point is there are other countries, including in the Asia Pacific, in Latin America and across the entire globe. If some major conclusions were made, then we might witness some major changes in global politics. Whether it is the end of domineering or not depends primarily on the economic potential of the countries in the international arena.

Our task is to pool efforts and achieve better results in the development of our own countries by working with partners and using the rule the Indian Prime Minister mentioned: Sangam, pooling efforts. And then Russia’s importance and Russia’s voice will grow to the benefit of the Russian people and also of all our partners.

Sergei Brilyov: Let’s ask our partners.

In a speech he made this week, President Biden voiced what you have just said, to a certain degree, that the era of military operations for the sake of nation building has ended. This is an approximation of what he said, although I think that was the phrase he used.

Vladimir Putin: Well, let’s hope so.

Sergei Brilyov: What upset me in his statement, if you listen to it in its entirety, is that he is the President of the United States, and he addressed his countrymen. However, the president of the nation that had launched all that in Afghanistan was somehow expected to address at least his allies, if not the world. Biden’s speech did not even mention their closest allies, who had fought alongside the Americans in Afghanistan all these years. And the idea was voiced – and it’s not the first time we hear it from the Americans – that there will be no terror attacks on their country while the others – though it wasn’t actually said this way but the message was: “Who cares?”

The thoughts that spring into my mind, and I am not sure if it is a conspiracy theory, that those poor translators who had been working for decades with the Americans and allied forces could be sacrificed along with women’s and girls’ rights. Whatever the Taliban might be doing, it has already been stated that women and girls are not going to have the rights they used to enjoy just recently, even if only formally. So, it is about leaving that country and really ending that twenty-year war while shifting all the problems to the neighbouring countries to a large degree: the proliferation of weapons, drugs and refugees.

My question on this issue is for President Tokayev. I am not asking you to agree or disagree with what I am saying. I am an irresponsible journalist whereas you are a statesman. Nevertheless, what is your vision of the aftermath of this whirlwind withdrawal of the Americans from Afghanistan today, and later possibly also from Iraq? The overnight collapse of the previous government, the arrival of the Taliban, the start of a new confrontation with the so-called Islamic State, a new confrontation in Panjshir. What does all this mean for the region? What do you expect to happen?

Kassym-Jomart Tokayev: We were certainly gravely concerned about the developments in Afghanistan. We duly took steps to evacuate our citizens from that country, although our embassy remained there, came into contact with Taliban representatives and managed to agree on the security measures for the diplomats and the embassy.

In addition, at the request of the United Nations, we made it possible for 237 staff of that international organisation to arrive in Kazakhstan by two charter flights. Currently they are working remotely from the territory of Kazakhstan.

We provided Kazakhstan’s air space and airports for flying and refuelling the aircraft that were evacuating the contingent operating in Afghanistan, including the military contingents of NATO countries and the United States.

As to the issue of taking in Afghan refugees who used to work with the US administration for an uncertain period of time – it could be two, three or six months – we did not agree to it because a great many nuances emerged connected with Kazakhstan’s sovereignty. The people who were to come to Kazakhstan did not have entry visas. Besides, the logistics did not make it possible to resolve the issue.

Regarding the aftermath, very briefly. First, Afghanistan will definitely not be the Afghanistan it used to be. They have a new government there and in all probability the regime has come to stay. As for hostilities in Panjshir between the forces headed by Ahmad Shah Massoud’s son and those of the current regime in Kabul, it is hard to foretell the results because the Taliban have an advantage so far. I think and I have already said that we must closely watch the actions of this regime.

We note peaceful statements, we notice that the Taliban leaders say they would like to have friendly relations with all countries. Obviously, it also concerns the Central Asian states. At any rate, I would like to return to the initial thesis that we, the Central Asian states, especially those that are party to the Collective Security Treaty Organisation, must keep together because the developments are unpredictable.

I believe soon a large number of Afghans will want to cross the border and settle somewhere outside their country for safety reasons. This is a very serious challenge for a number of countries.

As for the United States, I am by no means inclined to indulge in malicious gloating over how all this has happened. Indeed, there is a great difference between how the Soviet Union pulled out its troops and how it happened now. So, this was the end of it. We should all put our heads together now to address the situation with Afghanistan.

Incidentally, Kazakhstan has traditionally seen Afghanistan as a good market for its products, primarily wheat. They always paid on time. We agreed with President Ghani that they would send a large trade delegation to Kazakhstan to sign relevant agreements, so we could diversify our trade and economic cooperation; however, this was not destined to happen. Anyway, people need to eat, including those who are living under the Taliban. They are interested in receiving staple goods, including from Kazakhstan. It is a very important factor that, naturally, will influence our approach to this regime.

As for the United States, some people have told me that the Americans do not care what is happening outside their country, overseas, and life in America will go on as usual. I cannot agree with this. No matter what, there will, of course, be implications for the US domestic policy and foreign policy in a broader sense, because Afghanistan is a very important country, which, of course, will have an indirect but serious effect on politics, including on US policy.

Of course, I am far from predicting the course of events in Washington, the White House and so on, and it is not the topic of our conversation, but, in my opinion, there will be implications and very serious implications at that.

Thank you for your attention.

Sergei Brilyov: Mr Tokayev, here is a very practical question that may surprise you, although I do not think it will.

What is truly frightening at the moment is that nobody has invented anything new. At one time Fidel Castro let criminals leave the country together with dissidents. Likewise, there may be people who have truly suffered among the Afghan refugees but there may also be specially trained agents of the Islamic State.

You are a Kazakh. I know that Kazakhs and Uzbeks understand each other, read each other’s thoughts and so on. As a Kazakh, can you distinguish an Uzbek from Uzbekistan from an Uzbek from Afghanistan, who can be much more dangerous, just by looking at them? Do we – the CSTO and the Eurasian Union – have tried-and-tested migration and other mechanisms for separating these migration flows? They will soon be coming. Can you personally tell an Uzbek from Uzbekistan from an Uzbek from Afghanistan?

Kassym-Jomart Tokayev: Of course, it is very easy. After all, we have all come from the Soviet Union. I think it is very easy to tell those who once lived in the USSR and now live in the post-Soviet territory.

I think we have always been identified as such. As a consular employee in Singapore, I met many people who made flight transfers. At that time, Aeroflot flew only to Singapore and then Soviet people had to transfer to other flights to Australia or the Philippines. When I was told to meet different delegations flying to Australia, for example, I identified them easily. The same applied to those delegations that were returning from Australia and made a transit stop in Singapore. People recognise us anywhere. That is the way things are.

As for the migration authorities, border guards and so on, this is their professional duty. It is not a problem.

Sergei Brilyov: I hope so.

Kassym-Jomart Tokayev: As for the language, the Taliban mostly consists of Pashtuns, who have their own Pashto language. If I am correct, Dari is the language of interethnic communication in Afghanistan. It is very close to Farsi and Tajik. As for other countries, including Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, we speak Turkic dialects. We understand each other but this is a different linguistic branch. There is a lot of diversity but we can recognise each other.

Sergei Brilyov: Let us hope that the CSTO members will share expertise because this is a very clear issue.

And my last question. You have kept your embassy in Kabul. Will you recognise the Taliban now? The prime minister is about to be appointed, if it has not yet happened during out session.

Kassym-Jomart Tokayev: This is a sensitive issue. It requires a careful approach. I said many times, I think three times today that we will closely follow the actions of the Taliban. Everything depends on this. That said, as realists we believe the Taliban will be in power in that country for a long time. We will proceed from this premise. As I have already said, we traditionally trade with Afghanistan and this is one more factor that will determine our attitude to its regime.

Sergei Brilyov: Thank you.

Mr President, what will Russia decide regarding the recognition of the Taliban?

Vladimir Putin: First, let us not forget that the United States introduced its troops into Afghanistan after the heinous terrorist attacks on the International Trade Centre in New York. This entire operation was aimed at countering terrorism. Now the reality is such that the Taliban controls practically the entire territory of Afghanistan with the exception of Panjshir and small northern areas adjacent to Tajikistan.

Today, the Taliban is in control. If this is the case, we must proceed from reality. Of course, I agree with the President of Kazakhstan and many other colleagues, and I have discussed this with many of them recently, we must understand what stands behind the statements made by the Taliban leaders.

But I would like to draw your attention to one point. It was with a reason that I pointed out that the US brought its troops after the terrorist attacks on New York. The Taliban is not a homogenous movement, although it mostly consists of Pashtun tribes. This is perfectly obvious and I fully agree with my colleague from Kazakhstan. There are many representatives of other organisations in Afghanistan, including extremist groups like ISIS. Many people have been released from prisons, as you have just said, and there are radicals among them.

This is what I thought about in this context. Russia is not interested in Afghanistan’s disintegration, and if it happens, there will be nobody to talk to. If this is the case, we must realise that the sooner the Taliban joins the family of civilised nations, the easier it will be to communicate with it and influence it, ask certain questions and suggest, if not demand, that they observe certain civilised rules in the framework of these civilised relations. In the event of disintegration, there will be nobody to talk to. There is the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan and a host of others in Afghanistan and all this threatens our allies and neighbours. Considering we have no visa restrictions and the movement across the borders is free, this is very important for us, for ensuring Russia’s security. All of us must pool our efforts now in order to counter these problems together.

A agree with the President of Kazakhstan: of course, we must resolve together the issue of legalising the political forces in Afghanistan proceeding from what is happening in real life. But let me repeat that we must pool our efforts.

When I hear statements by high-ranking US officials that they will release their forces and focus on the struggle against China or Russia, I am tempted to say: Why not first deal with those you fought against for 20 years before declaring your intention to oppose Russia and China? Why make such statements at this moment?

Let me repeat that it is necessary to unite in order to effectively fight terrorism, a mission for which the Americans brought their troops into Afghanistan, and counter the spread of drugs and organised crime. These are common threats and since they are common, we can counter them only by concerted efforts.

Sergei Brilyov: Well, let us ask the President of Mongolia as the President of a happy country. After all, you are a bit aside from the Afghan subject. You are close geographically but still apart.

Here is my question to Mr Khurelsukh. Indeed, you look at all this a bit as an outsider. Are you content with the security mechanisms in Asia? There has been dialogue over the past 25 years. All participants came to the Shangri-La hotel in Singapore, held meetings and talked. Different powers were represented there. Russia and the United States were regular visitors. But now, after the collapse in Afghanistan, there are new realities altogether. But what encroachments were made in the past two or three years? Let us forget ASEAN and create a new Pacific NATO. This is a sovereign decision of states. This is an alliance. Roughly speaking, it consists of the United States, Australia and Japan. It is aimed against China, as it was sometimes said for the record.

Here is neutral Mongolia that has lived between the two huge mechanisms for centuries. I would not even call them countries. There is a Russian mechanism and a Chinese mechanism. Mongolia, which is looking around, is a third neighbour. I know you have this expression about various third neighbours.

So, Mr President of Mongolia, tell us please if our life in Asia is satisfactory in terms of security.

Ukhnaagiin Khurelsukh: Mongolia is located both in Central Asia and North-Eastern Asia. As a North-Eastern Asian country, we pay much attention to the security of our region and are closely following the developments in the Asia-Pacific Region.

You said that we have no terrorism in our country and lead a peaceful life. We do not have any wars or a threat of terrorism and we peacefully coexist with our two neighbours. We do not have any border disputes with Russia or China. We are taking part in the talks on this issue with both Russia and China. We believe the issue of the Korean Peninsula must be resolved without the use of force.

As for Afghanistan, we are certainly concerned about the developments in that country. The United States and the members of the US-led coalition adopted a very quick decision that created big problems. In turn, this is exerting a very adverse influence on the situation in the region, in particular, on its security.

As a Central Asian country, we had close relations with Afghanistan, in the 13th century and during the Soviet times. As you know, recently our peacekeepers held an operation in that country.

Today, the Taliban has come to power in that country. The domestic political and economic situation in Afghanistan remains tense. It is undergoing a deep economic crisis and there is a big threat to the security of its citizens. All this is affecting their attitudes. They are directly facing a threat of physical destruction. Therefore, we believe it is necessary to pay attention to this regional problem. We think we must continue dialogue on this issue and pay close attention to it in the UN and regional organisations. I hope that the power structures that are now ruling that country will make a sensible decision.

We hope that country will not fall apart but will unite to form a single powerful and peaceful state. This is what we sincerely wish it. I think other countries wish Afghanistan the same. The international community is closely following the developments in that country in terms of security and peaceful life.

Thank you.

Sergei Brilyov: Thank you.

Generally speaking, Ulaanbaatar looks like an Asian Geneva, Mr Putin. Why don’t you meet with Mr Biden there next time? Look what a wonderful platform.

Kassym-Jomart Tokayev: Mr Brilyov, I would like to add one more factor to the issue of recognising the Taliban or not. I think it is very important. I am referring to two resolutions that outlawed the Taliban. The UN Security Council adopted them in 2003 and 2011. If we start discussing the recognition of the Taliban, we must certainly take note of them. The role of the UN Security Council – Russia, China, the United States, France and the United Kingdom – is of decisive importance in this respect. I think we are again returning to the UN venue and this is very meaningful.

Sergei Brilyov: Mr Tokayev, I graduated from the same institute as you. If you remember, we had a course on the history of international relations and foreign policy. This debate about the recognition or non-recognition of the Taliban reminds me of the Anglo-Soviet-US correspondence on recognising the Badoglio government in Italy in 1944. This is going to end in some way but it does not matter.

Mr President, this is probably the last point. Believe it or not but I partly get paid for watching TV. When I arrived in Vladivostok, I started watching the local channels, primarily ours, the VGTRK channels: East 24 and a wonderful programme “News. Far East” on Rossiya 24. This is a very interesting programme. It starts at 10 pm and I recommend it to all of you. I wrote down the topics that I liked the most over these days.

Today, we spoke a lot about the development of the Far East and suggested industrial projects. I made notes on my phone. Look what I wrote: a bridge is under construction in Magadan. It is similar to the bridge in Zaryadye in Moscow. It looks like it will make life more convenient. There is a new crab fishery in Khabarovsk. Ski tracks have been extended here on Russky Island. There is an ornithological centre on Kamchatka. I am not sure whether you are aware of what has been done in this respect. In the past, poachers were hunting these birds of prey (all kinds of falcons) and took them to Arab countries. Now it is the other way round. The Arabs provided the locals with a breeding flock of 300 birds. So, they will engage in mutually beneficial trade. A centre is under construction. It is incredible. It has a pavilion… Speaking seriously, this is not even the 22nd century; it is like another planet.

One of the latest news is that Vladivostok wants to apply to host the 2036 Olympics. Maybe we should finish our discussion on this point. Will you support such an application from Vladivostok?

Vladimir Putin: As you know, unfortunately, fewer and fewer countries want to host the Olympics. First, it is an expensive undertaking and, second, it is difficult these days due to the need to counter the pandemic and infectious diseases. There are many other factors as well. You saw that during the preparations and holding of the Games there were many protests in Japan. Its residents protested against the hosting of the Games.

But we have always supported the Olympic movement and I hope its principles will not be distorted or mixed with politics. If everything will be as I say, we do not rule out the possibility of hosting the Olympics in the Russian Federation. The Far East and Vladivostok are promising venues, but it is too early to talk about it. We should first calculate everything, although holding major international political and sports events always promoted the development of the host region.

Today we are meeting on the territory of the Far Eastern Federal University. It was built during the preparations for an APEC summit. We could have held this summit in Moscow or St Petersburg. They have ready venues and it would not have taken as much time and money to hold it there. However, I decided to hold it here and build this complex for the development of the education system. I do not regret anything and think it was the right thing to do. In addition, we built a new airport and a railway that links the airport with the city centre, and did many other things. This provided an impetus for the development of Vladivostok.

In general, if we take the opportunity and conduct major sports competitions, they will further promote the development of the city and the region as a whole. I do not rule it out. But the necessary conditions must be created for that. As I said, Russia must be a full-fledged participant in major international competitions but this does not depend on us. It depends on those who politicise international sports.

I hope we have enough unifying venues, such as art, sports and the fight against common challenges to be guided by common interests rather than some selfish political considerations.

Sergei Brilyov: Well,

Esteemed participants in the plenary session of the Eastern Economic Forum, let us thank once again those who sent their video addresses to us: President of the People’s Republic of China Xi Jinping, Prime Minister of India Narendra Modi, and Prime Minister of Thailand Prayut Chan-o-cha. We had a direct link with President of the Republic of Kazakhstan Kassym-Jomart Tokayev and President of Mongolia Ukhnaagiin Khurelsukh.

I would also like to thank the host of our meeting, President Vladimir Putin. Thank you very much. I hope to see you at future forums.

Vladimir Putin: As per tradition, I would like to thank our moderator and all participants in our session for coming to Vladivostok. You devoted much time to this. Thank you for thinking about implementing your projects in the Far East. I hope they will be successful. For its part, the state will do everything it can for this purpose.

Thank you.



////



Article by Vladimir Putin ”On the Historical Unity of Russians and Ukrainians“
Event_Date: 12/7/2021
Event_Time: 17:00
Event_Place: The_Kremlin_Moscow


During the recent Direct Line, when I was asked about Russian-Ukrainian relations, I said that Russians and Ukrainians were one people – a single whole. These words were not driven by some short-term considerations or prompted by the current political context. It is what I have said on numerous occasions and what I firmly believe. I therefore feel it necessary to explain my position in detail and share my assessments of today's situation.

First of all, I would like to emphasize that the wall that has emerged in recent years between Russia and Ukraine, between the parts of what is essentially the same historical and spiritual space, to my mind is our great common misfortune and tragedy. These are, first and foremost, the consequences of our own mistakes made at different periods of time. But these are also the result of deliberate efforts by those forces that have always sought to undermine our unity. The formula they apply has been known from time immemorial – divide and rule. There is nothing new here. Hence the attempts to play on the ”national question“ and sow discord among people, the overarching goal being to divide and then to pit the parts of a single people against one another.

To have a better understanding of the present and look into the future, we need to turn to history. Certainly, it is impossible to cover in this article all the developments that have taken place over more than a thousand years. But I will focus on the key, pivotal moments that are important for us to remember, both in Russia and Ukraine.

Russians, Ukrainians, and Belarusians are all descendants of Ancient Rus, which was the largest state in Europe. Slavic and other tribes across the vast territory – from Ladoga, Novgorod, and Pskov to Kiev and Chernigov – were bound together by one language (which we now refer to as Old Russian), economic ties, the rule of the princes of the Rurik dynasty, and – after the baptism of Rus – the Orthodox faith. The spiritual choice made by St. Vladimir, who was both Prince of Novgorod and Grand Prince of Kiev, still largely determines our affinity today.

The throne of Kiev held a dominant position in Ancient Rus. This had been the custom since the late 9th century. The Tale of Bygone Years captured for posterity the words of Oleg the Prophet about Kiev, ”Let it be the mother of all Russian cities.“

Later, like other European states of that time, Ancient Rus faced a decline of central rule and fragmentation. At the same time, both the nobility and the common people perceived Rus as a common territory, as their homeland.

The fragmentation intensified after Batu Khan's devastating invasion, which ravaged many cities, including Kiev. The northeastern part of Rus fell under the control of the Golden Horde but retained limited sovereignty. The southern and western Russian lands largely became part of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, which – most significantly – was referred to in historical records as the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and Russia.

Members of the princely and ”boyar“ clans would change service from one prince to another, feuding with each other but also making friendships and alliances. Voivode Bobrok of Volyn and the sons of Grand Duke of Lithuania Algirdas – Andrey of Polotsk and Dmitry of Bryansk – fought next to Grand Duke Dmitry Ivanovich of Moscow on the Kulikovo field. At the same time, Grand Duke of Lithuania Jogaila – son of the Princess of Tver – led his troops to join with Mamai. These are all pages of our shared history, reflecting its complex and multi-dimensional nature.

Most importantly, people both in the western and eastern Russian lands spoke the same language. Their faith was Orthodox. Up to the middle of the 15th century, the unified church government remained in place.

At a new stage of historical development, both Lithuanian Rus and Moscow Rus could have become the points of attraction and consolidation of the territories of Ancient Rus. It so happened that Moscow became the center of reunification, continuing the tradition of ancient Russian statehood. Moscow princes – the descendants of Prince Alexander Nevsky – cast off the foreign yoke and began gathering the Russian lands.

In the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, other processes were unfolding. In the 14th century, Lithuania's ruling elite converted to Catholicism. In the 16th century, it signed the Union of Lublin with the Kingdom of Poland to form the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth. The Polish Catholic nobility received considerable land holdings and privileges in the territory of Rus. In accordance with the 1596 Union of Brest, part of the western Russian Orthodox clergy submitted to the authority of the Pope. The process of Polonization and Latinization began, ousting Orthodoxy.

As a consequence, in the 16–17th centuries, the liberation movement of the Orthodox population was gaining strength in the Dnieper region. The events during the times of Hetman Bohdan Khmelnytsky became a turning point. His supporters struggled for autonomy from the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth.

In its 1649 appeal to the king of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, the Zaporizhian Host demanded that the rights of the Russian Orthodox population be respected, that the voivode of Kiev be Russian and of Greek faith, and that the persecution of the churches of God be stopped. But the Cossacks were not heard.

Bohdan Khmelnytsky then made appeals to Moscow, which were considered by the Zemsky Sobor. On 1 October 1653, members of the supreme representative body of the Russian state decided to support their brothers in faith and take them under patronage. In January 1654, the Pereyaslav Council confirmed that decision. Subsequently, the ambassadors of Bohdan Khmelnytsky and Moscow visited dozens of cities, including Kiev, whose populations swore allegiance to the Russian tsar. Incidentally, nothing of the kind happened at the conclusion of the Union of Lublin.

In a letter to Moscow in 1654, Bohdan Khmelnytsky thanked Tsar Aleksey Mikhaylovich for taking ”the whole Zaporizhian Host and the whole Russian Orthodox world under the strong and high hand of the Tsar“. It means that, in their appeals to both the Polish king and the Russian tsar, the Cossacks referred to and defined themselves as Russian Orthodox people.

Over the course of the protracted war between the Russian state and the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, some of the hetmans, successors of Bohdan Khmelnytsky, would ”detach themselves“ from Moscow or seek support from Sweden, Poland, or Turkey. But, again, for the people, that was a war of liberation. It ended with the Truce of Andrusovo in 1667. The final outcome was sealed by the Treaty of Perpetual Peace in 1686. The Russian state incorporated the city of Kiev and the lands on the left bank of the Dnieper River, including Poltava region, Chernigov region, and Zaporozhye. Their inhabitants were reunited with the main part of the Russian Orthodox people. These territories were referred to as ”Malorossia“ (Little Russia).

The name ”Ukraine“ was used more often in the meaning of the Old Russian word ”okraina“ (periphery), which is found in written sources from the 12th century, referring to various border territories. And the word ”Ukrainian“, judging by archival documents, originally referred to frontier guards who protected the external borders.

On the right bank, which remained under the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, the old orders were restored, and social and religious oppression intensified. On the contrary, the lands on the left bank, taken under the protection of the unified state, saw rapid development. People from the other bank of the Dnieper moved here en masse. They sought support from people who spoke the same language and had the same faith.

During the Great Northern War with Sweden, the people in Malorossia were not faced with a choice of whom to side with. Only a small portion of the Cossacks supported Mazepa's rebellion. People of all orders and degrees considered themselves Russian and Orthodox.

Cossack senior officers belonging to the nobility would reach the heights of political, diplomatic, and military careers in Russia. Graduates of Kiev-Mohyla Academy played a leading role in church life. This was also the case during the Hetmanate – an essentially autonomous state formation with a special internal structure – and later in the Russian Empire. Malorussians in many ways helped build a big common country – its statehood, culture, and science. They participated in the exploration and development of the Urals, Siberia, the Caucasus, and the Far East. Incidentally, during the Soviet period, natives of Ukraine held major, including the highest, posts in the leadership of the unified state. Suffice it to say that Nikita Khrushchev and Leonid Brezhnev, whose party biography was most closely associated with Ukraine, led the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) for almost 30 years.

In the second half of the 18th century, following the wars with the Ottoman Empire, Russia incorporated Crimea and the lands of the Black Sea region, which became known as Novorossiya. They were populated by people from all of the Russian provinces. After the partitions of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, the Russian Empire regained the western Old Russian lands, with the exception of Galicia and Transcarpathia, which became part of the Austrian – and later Austro-Hungarian – Empire.

The incorporation of the western Russian lands into the single state was not merely the result of political and diplomatic decisions. It was underlain by the common faith, shared cultural traditions, and – I would like to emphasize it once again – language similarity. Thus, as early as the beginning of the 17th century, one of the hierarchs of the Uniate Church, Joseph Rutsky, communicated to Rome that people in Moscovia called Russians from the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth their brothers, that their written language was absolutely identical, and differences in the vernacular were insignificant. He drew an analogy with the residents of Rome and Bergamo. These are, as we know, the center and the north of modern Italy.

Many centuries of fragmentation and living within different states naturally brought about regional language peculiarities, resulting in the emergence of dialects. The vernacular enriched the literary language. Ivan Kotlyarevsky, Grigory Skovoroda, and Taras Shevchenko played a huge role here. Their works are our common literary and cultural heritage. Taras Shevchenko wrote poetry in the Ukrainian language, and prose mainly in Russian. The books of Nikolay Gogol, a Russian patriot and native of Poltavshchyna, are written in Russian, bristling with Malorussian folk sayings and motifs. How can this heritage be divided between Russia and Ukraine? And why do it?

The south-western lands of the Russian Empire, Malorussia and Novorossiya, and the Crimea developed as ethnically and religiously diverse entities. Crimean Tatars, Armenians, Greeks, Jews, Karaites, Krymchaks, Bulgarians, Poles, Serbs, Germans, and other peoples lived here. They all preserved their faith, traditions, and customs.

I am not going to idealise anything. We do know there were the Valuev Circular of 1863 an then the Ems Ukaz of 1876, which restricted the publication and importation of religious and socio-political literature in the Ukrainian language. But it is important to be mindful of the historical context. These decisions were taken against the backdrop of dramatic events in Poland and the desire of the leaders of the Polish national movement to exploit the ”Ukrainian issue“ to their own advantage. I should add that works of fiction, books of Ukrainian poetry and folk songs continued to be published. There is objective evidence that the Russian Empire was witnessing an active process of development of the Malorussian cultural identity within the greater Russian nation, which united the Velikorussians, the Malorussians and the Belorussians.

At the same time, the idea of Ukrainian people as a nation separate from the Russians started to form and gain ground among the Polish elite and a part of the Malorussian intelligentsia. Since there was no historical basis – and could not have been any, conclusions were substantiated by all sorts of concoctions, which went as far as to claim that the Ukrainians are the true Slavs and the Russians, the Muscovites, are not. Such ”hypotheses“ became increasingly used for political purposes as a tool of rivalry between European states.

Since the late 19th century, the Austro-Hungarian authorities had latched onto this narrative, using it as a counterbalance to the Polish national movement and pro-Muscovite sentiments in Galicia. During World War I, Vienna played a role in the formation of the so-called Legion of Ukrainian Sich Riflemen. Galicians suspected of sympathies with Orthodox Christianity and Russia were subjected to brutal repression and thrown into the concentration camps of Thalerhof and Terezin.

Further developments had to do with the collapse of European empires, the fierce civil war that broke out across the vast territory of the former Russian Empire, and foreign intervention.

After the February Revolution, in March 1917, the Central Rada was established in Kiev, intended to become the organ of supreme power. In November 1917, in its Third Universal, it declared the creation of the Ukrainian People's Republic (UPR) as part of Russia.

In December 1917, UPR representatives arrived in Brest-Litovsk, where Soviet Russia was negotiating with Germany and its allies. At a meeting on 10 January 1918, the head of the Ukrainian delegation read out a note proclaiming the independence of Ukraine. Subsequently, the Central Rada proclaimed Ukraine independent in its Fourth Universal.

The declared sovereignty did not last long. Just a few weeks later, Rada delegates signed a separate treaty with the German bloc countries. Germany and Austria-Hungary were at the time in a dire situation and needed Ukrainian bread and raw materials. In order to secure large-scale supplies, they obtained consent for sending their troops and technical staff to the UPR. In fact, this was used as a pretext for occupation.

For those who have today given up the full control of Ukraine to external forces, it would be instructive to remember that, back in 1918, such a decision proved fatal for the ruling regime in Kiev. With the direct involvement of the occupying forces, the Central Rada was overthrown and Hetman Pavlo Skoropadskyi was brought to power, proclaiming instead of the UPR the Ukrainian State, which was essentially under German protectorate.

In November 1918 – following the revolutionary events in Germany and Austria-Hungary – Pavlo Skoropadskyi, who had lost the support of German bayonets, took a different course, declaring that ”Ukraine is to take the lead in the formation of an All-Russian Federation“. However, the regime was soon changed again. It was now the time of the so-called Directorate.

In autumn 1918, Ukrainian nationalists proclaimed the West Ukrainian People's Republic (WUPR) and, in January 1919, announced its unification with the Ukrainian People's Republic. In July 1919, Ukrainian forces were crushed by Polish troops, and the territory of the former WUPR came under the Polish rule.

In April 1920, Symon Petliura (portrayed as one of the ”heroes“ in today's Ukraine) concluded secret conventions on behalf of the UPR Directorate, giving up – in exchange for military support – Galicia and Western Volhynia lands to Poland. In May 1920, Petliurites entered Kiev in a convoy of Polish military units. But not for long. As early as November 1920, following a truce between Poland and Soviet Russia, the remnants of Petliura's forces surrendered to those same Poles.

The example of the UPR shows that different kinds of quasi-state formations that emerged across the former Russian Empire at the time of the Civil War and turbulence were inherently unstable. Nationalists sought to create their own independent states, while leaders of the White movement advocated indivisible Russia. Many of the republics established by the Bolsheviks' supporters did not see themselves outside Russia either. Nevertheless, Bolshevik Party leaders sometimes basically drove them out of Soviet Russia for various reasons.

Thus, in early 1918, the Donetsk-Krivoy Rog Soviet Republic was proclaimed and asked Moscow to incorporate it into Soviet Russia. This was met with a refusal. During a meeting with the republic's leaders, Vladimir Lenin insisted that they act as part of Soviet Ukraine. On 15 March 1918, the Central Committee of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) directly ordered that delegates be sent to the Ukrainian Congress of Soviets, including from the Donetsk Basin, and that ”one government for all of Ukraine“ be created at the congress. The territories of the Donetsk-Krivoy Rog Soviet Republic later formed most of the regions of south-eastern Ukraine.

Under the 1921 Treaty of Riga, concluded between the Russian SFSR, the Ukrainian SSR and Poland, the western lands of the former Russian Empire were ceded to Poland. In the interwar period, the Polish government pursued an active resettlement policy, seeking to change the ethnic composition of the Eastern Borderlands – the Polish name for what is now Western Ukraine, Western Belarus and parts of Lithuania. The areas were subjected to harsh Polonisation, local culture and traditions suppressed. Later, during World War II, radical groups of Ukrainian nationalists used this as a pretext for terror not only against Polish, but also against Jewish and Russian populations.

In 1922, when the USSR was created, with the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic becoming one of its founders, a rather fierce debate among the Bolshevik leaders resulted in the implementation of Lenin's plan to form a union state as a federation of equal republics. The right for the republics to freely secede from the Union was included in the text of the Declaration on the Creation of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and, subsequently, in the 1924 USSR Constitution. By doing so, the authors planted in the foundation of our statehood the most dangerous time bomb, which exploded the moment the safety mechanism provided by the leading role of the CPSU was gone, the party itself collapsing from within. A ”parade of sovereignties“ followed. On 8 December 1991, the so-called Belovezh Agreement on the Creation of the Commonwealth of Independent States was signed, stating that ”the USSR as a subject of international law and a geopolitical reality no longer existed.“ By the way, Ukraine never signed or ratified the CIS Charter adopted back in 1993.

In the 1920's-1930's, the Bolsheviks actively promoted the ”localization policy“, which took the form of Ukrainization in the Ukrainian SSR. Symbolically, as part of this policy and with consent of the Soviet authorities, Mikhail Grushevskiy, former chairman of Central Rada, one of the ideologists of Ukrainian nationalism, who at a certain period of time had been supported by Austria-Hungary, was returned to the USSR and was elected member of the Academy of Sciences.

The localization policy undoubtedly played a major role in the development and consolidation of the Ukrainian culture, language and identity. At the same time, under the guise of combating the so-called Russian great-power chauvinism, Ukrainization was often imposed on those who did not see themselves as Ukrainians. This Soviet national policy secured at the state level the provision on three separate Slavic peoples: Russian, Ukrainian and Belorussian, instead of the large Russian nation, a triune people comprising Velikorussians, Malorussians and Belorussians.

In 1939, the USSR regained the lands earlier seized by Poland. A major portion of these became part of the Soviet Ukraine. In 1940, the Ukrainian SSR incorporated part of Bessarabia, which had been occupied by Romania since 1918, as well as Northern Bukovina. In 1948, Zmeyiniy Island (Snake Island) in the Black Sea became part of Ukraine. In 1954, the Crimean Region of the RSFSR was given to the Ukrainian SSR, in gross violation of legal norms that were in force at the time.

I would like to dwell on the destiny of Carpathian Ruthenia, which became part of Czechoslovakia following the breakup of Austria-Hungary. Rusins made up a considerable share of local population. While this is hardly mentioned any longer, after the liberation of Transcarpathia by Soviet troops the congress of the Orthodox population of the region voted for the inclusion of Carpathian Ruthenia in the RSFSR or, as a separate Carpathian republic, in the USSR proper. Yet the choice of people was ignored. In summer 1945, the historical act of the reunification of Carpathian Ukraine ”with its ancient motherland, Ukraine“ – as The Pravda newspaper put it – was announced.

Therefore, modern Ukraine is entirely the product of the Soviet era. We know and remember well that it was shaped – for a significant part – on the lands of historical Russia. To make sure of that, it is enough to look at the boundaries of the lands reunited with the Russian state in the 17th century and the territory of the Ukrainian SSR when it left the Soviet Union.

The Bolsheviks treated the Russian people as inexhaustible material for their social experiments. They dreamt of a world revolution that would wipe out national states. That is why they were so generous in drawing borders and bestowing territorial gifts. It is no longer important what exactly the idea of the Bolshevik leaders who were chopping the country into pieces was. We can disagree about minor details, background and logics behind certain decisions. One fact is crystal clear: Russia was robbed, indeed.

When working on this article, I relied on open-source documents that contain well-known facts rather than on some secret records. The leaders of modern Ukraine and their external ”patrons“ prefer to overlook these facts. They do not miss a chance, however, both inside the country and abroad, to condemn ”the crimes of the Soviet regime,“ listing among them events with which neither the CPSU, nor the USSR, let alone modern Russia, have anything to do. At the same time, the Bolsheviks' efforts to detach from Russia its historical territories are not considered a crime. And we know why: if they brought about the weakening of Russia, our ill-wishes are happy with that.

Of course, inside the USSR, borders between republics were never seen as state borders; they were nominal within a single country, which, while featuring all the attributes of a federation, was highly centralized – this, again, was secured by the CPSU's leading role. But in 1991, all those territories, and, which is more important, people, found themselves abroad overnight, taken away, this time indeed, from their historical motherland.

What can be said to this? Things change: countries and communities are no exception. Of course, some part of a people in the process of its development, influenced by a number of reasons and historical circumstances, can become aware of itself as a separate nation at a certain moment. How should we treat that? There is only one answer: with respect!

You want to establish a state of your own: you are welcome! But what are the terms? I will recall the assessment given by one of the most prominent political figures of new Russia, first mayor of Saint Petersburg Anatoly Sobchak. As a legal expert who believed that every decision must be legitimate, in 1992, he shared the following opinion: the republics that were founders of the Union, having denounced the 1922 Union Treaty, must return to the boundaries they had had before joining the Soviet Union. All other territorial acquisitions are subject to discussion, negotiations, given that the ground has been revoked.

In other words, when you leave, take what you brought with you. This logic is hard to refute. I will just say that the Bolsheviks had embarked on reshaping boundaries even before the Soviet Union, manipulating with territories to their liking, in disregard of people's views.

The Russian Federation recognized the new geopolitical realities: and not only recognized, but, indeed, did a lot for Ukraine to establish itself as an independent country. Throughout the difficult 1990's and in the new millennium, we have provided considerable support to Ukraine. Whatever ”political arithmetic“ of its own Kiev may wish to apply, in 1991–2013, Ukraine's budget savings amounted to more than USD 82 billion, while today, it holds on to the mere USD 1.5 billion of Russian payments for gas transit to Europe. If economic ties between our countries had been retained, Ukraine would enjoy the benefit of tens of billions of dollars.

Ukraine and Russia have developed as a single economic system over decades and centuries. The profound cooperation we had 30 years ago is an example for the European Union to look up to. We are natural complementary economic partners. Such a close relationship can strengthen competitive advantages, increasing the potential of both countries.

Ukraine used to possess great potential, which included powerful infrastructure, gas transportation system, advanced shipbuilding, aviation, rocket and instrument engineering industries, as well as world-class scientific, design and engineering schools. Taking over this legacy and declaring independence, Ukrainian leaders promised that the Ukrainian economy would be one of the leading ones and the standard of living would be among the best in Europe.

Today, high-tech industrial giants that were once the pride of Ukraine and the entire Union, are sinking. Engineering output has dropped by 42 per cent over ten years. The scale of deindustrialization and overall economic degradation is visible in Ukraine's electricity production, which has seen a nearly two-time decrease in 30 years. Finally, according to IMF reports, in 2019, before the coronavirus pandemic broke out, Ukraine's GDP per capita had been below USD 4 thousand. This is less than in the Republic of Albania, the Republic of Moldova, or unrecognized Kosovo. Nowadays, Ukraine is Europe's poorest country.

Who is to blame for this? Is it the people of Ukraine's fault? Certainly not. It was the Ukrainian authorities who waisted and frittered away the achievements of many generations. We know how hardworking and talented the people of Ukraine are. They can achieve success and outstanding results with perseverance and determination. And these qualities, as well as their openness, innate optimism and hospitality have not gone. The feelings of millions of people who treat Russia not just well but with great affection, just as we feel about Ukraine, remain the same.

Until 2014, hundreds of agreements and joint projects were aimed at developing our economies, business and cultural ties, strengthening security, and solving common social and environmental problems. They brought tangible benefits to people – both in Russia and Ukraine. This is what we believed to be most important. And that is why we had a fruitful interaction with all, I emphasize, with all the leaders of Ukraine.

Even after the events in Kiev of 2014, I charged the Russian government to elaborate options for preserving and maintaining our economic ties within relevant ministries and agencies. However, there was and is still no mutual will to do the same. Nevertheless, Russia is still one of Ukraine's top three trading partners, and hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians are coming to us to work, and they find a welcome reception and support. So that what the ”aggressor state“ is.

When the USSR collapsed, many people in Russia and Ukraine sincerely believed and assumed that our close cultural, spiritual and economic ties would certainly last, as would the commonality of our people, who had always had a sense of unity at their core. However, events – at first gradually, and then more rapidly – started to move in a different direction.

In essence, Ukraine's ruling circles decided to justify their country's independence through the denial of its past, however, except for border issues. They began to mythologize and rewrite history, edit out everything that united us, and refer to the period when Ukraine was part of the Russian Empire and the Soviet Union as an occupation. The common tragedy of collectivization and famine of the early 1930s was portrayed as the genocide of the Ukrainian people.

Radicals and neo-Nazis were open and more and more insolent about their ambitions. They were indulged by both the official authorities and local oligarchs, who robbed the people of Ukraine and kept their stolen money in Western banks, ready to sell their motherland for the sake of preserving their capital. To this should be added the persistent weakness of state institutions and the position of a willing hostage to someone else's geopolitical will.

I recall that long ago, well before 2014, the U.S. and EU countries systematically and consistently pushed Ukraine to curtail and limit economic cooperation with Russia. We, as the largest trade and economic partner of Ukraine, suggested discussing the emerging problems in the Ukraine-Russia-EU format. But every time we were told that Russia had nothing to do with it and that the issue concerned only the EU and Ukraine. De facto Western countries rejected Russia's repeated calls for dialogue.

Step by step, Ukraine was dragged into a dangerous geopolitical game aimed at turning Ukraine into a barrier between Europe and Russia, a springboard against Russia. Inevitably, there came a time when the concept of ”Ukraine is not Russia“ was no longer an option. There was a need for the ”anti-Russia“ concept which we will never accept.

The owners of this project took as a basis the old groundwork of the Polish-Austrian ideologists to create an ”anti-Moscow Russia“. And there is no need to deceive anyone that this is being done in the interests of the people of Ukraine. The Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth never needed Ukrainian culture, much less Cossack autonomy. In Austria-Hungary, historical Russian lands were mercilessly exploited and remained the poorest. The Nazis, abetted by collaborators from the OUN-UPA, did not need Ukraine, but a living space and slaves for Aryan overlords.

Nor were the interests of the Ukrainian people thought of in February 2014. The legitimate public discontent, caused by acute socio-economic problems, mistakes, and inconsistent actions of the authorities of the time, was simply cynically exploited. Western countries directly interfered in Ukraine's internal affairs and supported the coup. Radical nationalist groups served as its battering ram. Their slogans, ideology, and blatant aggressive Russophobia have to a large extent become defining elements of state policy in Ukraine.

All the things that united us and bring us together so far came under attack. First and foremost, the Russian language. Let me remind you that the new ”Maidan“ authorities first tried to repeal the law on state language policy. Then there was the law on the ”purification of power“, the law on education that virtually cut the Russian language out of the educational process.

Lastly, as early as May of this year, the current president introduced a bill on ”indigenous peoples“ to the Rada. Only those who constitute an ethnic minority and do not have their own state entity outside Ukraine are recognized as indigenous. The law has been passed. New seeds of discord have been sown. And this is happening in a country, as I have already noted, that is very complex in terms of its territorial, national and linguistic composition, and its history of formation.

There may be an argument: if you are talking about a single large nation, a triune nation, then what difference does it make who people consider themselves to be – Russians, Ukrainians, or Belarusians. I completely agree with this. Especially since the determination of nationality, particularly in mixed families, is the right of every individual, free to make his or her own choice.

But the fact is that the situation in Ukraine today is completely different because it involves a forced change of identity. And the most despicable thing is that the Russians in Ukraine are being forced not only to deny their roots, generations of their ancestors but also to believe that Russia is their enemy. It would not be an exaggeration to say that the path of forced assimilation, the formation of an ethnically pure Ukrainian state, aggressive towards Russia, is comparable in its consequences to the use of weapons of mass destruction against us. As a result of such a harsh and artificial division of Russians and Ukrainians, the Russian people in all may decrease by hundreds of thousands or even millions.

Our spiritual unity has also been attacked. As in the days of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, a new ecclesiastical has been initiated. The secular authorities, making no secret of their political aims, have blatantly interfered in church life and brought things to a split, to the seizure of churches, the beating of priests and monks. Even extensive autonomy of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church while maintaining spiritual unity with the Moscow Patriarchate strongly displeases them. They have to destroy this prominent and centuries-old symbol of our kinship at all costs.

I think it is also natural that the representatives of Ukraine over and over again vote against the UN General Assembly resolution condemning the glorification of Nazism. Marches and torchlit processions in honor of remaining war criminals from the SS units take place under the protection of the official authorities. Mazepa, who betrayed everyone, Petliura, who paid for Polish patronage with Ukrainian lands, and Bandera, who collaborated with the Nazis, are ranked as national heroes. Everything is being done to erase from the memory of young generations the names of genuine patriots and victors, who have always been the pride of Ukraine.

For the Ukrainians who fought in the Red Army, in partisan units, the Great Patriotic War was indeed a patriotic war because they were defending their home, their great common Motherland. Over two thousand soldiers became Heroes of the Soviet Union. Among them are legendary pilot Ivan Kozhedub, fearless sniper, defender of Odessa and Sevastopol Lyudmila Pavlichenko, valiant guerrilla commander Sidor Kovpak. This indomitable generation fought, those people gave their lives for our future, for us. To forget their feat is to betray our grandfathers, mothers and fathers.

The anti-Russia project has been rejected by millions of Ukrainians. The people of Crimea and residents of Sevastopol made their historic choice. And people in the southeast peacefully tried to defend their stance. Yet, all of them, including children, were labeled as separatists and terrorists. They were threatened with ethnic cleansing and the use of military force. And the residents of Donetsk and Lugansk took up arms to defend their home, their language and their lives. Were they left any other choice after the riots that swept through the cities of Ukraine, after the horror and tragedy of 2 May 2014 in Odessa where Ukrainian neo-Nazis burned people alive making a new Khatyn out of it? The same massacre was ready to be carried out by the followers of Bandera in Crimea, Sevastopol, Donetsk and Lugansk. Even now they do not abandon such plans. They are biding their time. But their time will not come.

The coup d'état and the subsequent actions of the Kiev authorities inevitably provoked confrontation and civil war. The UN High Commissioner for Human Rights estimates that the total number of victims in the conflict in Donbas has exceeded 13,000. Among them are the elderly and children. These are terrible, irreparable losses.

Russia has done everything to stop fratricide. The Minsk agreements aimed at a peaceful settlement of the conflict in Donbas have been concluded. I am convinced that they still have no alternative. In any case, no one has withdrawn their signatures from the Minsk Package of Measures or from the relevant statements by the leaders of the Normandy format countries. No one has initiated a review of the United Nations Security Council resolution of 17 February 2015.

During official negotiations, especially after being reined in by Western partners, Ukraine's representatives regularly declare their ”full adherence“ to the Minsk agreements, but are in fact guided by a position of ”unacceptability“. They do not intend to seriously discuss either the special status of Donbas or safeguards for the people living there. They prefer to exploit the image of the ”victim of external aggression“ and peddle Russophobia. They arrange bloody provocations in Donbas. In short, they attract the attention of external patrons and masters by all means.

Apparently, and I am becoming more and more convinced of this: Kiev simply does not need Donbas. Why? Because, firstly, the inhabitants of these regions will never accept the order that they have tried and are trying to impose by force, blockade and threats. And secondly, the outcome of both Minsk‑1 and Minsk‑2 which give a real chance to peacefully restore the territorial integrity of Ukraine by coming to an agreement directly with the DPR and LPR with Russia, Germany and France as mediators, contradicts the entire logic of the anti-Russia project. And it can only be sustained by the constant cultivation of the image of an internal and external enemy. And I would add – under the protection and control of the Western powers.

This is what is actually happening. First of all, we are facing the creation of a climate of fear in Ukrainian society, aggressive rhetoric, indulging neo-Nazis and militarising the country. Along with that we are witnessing not just complete dependence but direct external control, including the supervision of the Ukrainian authorities, security services and armed forces by foreign advisers, military ”development“ of the territory of Ukraine and deployment of NATO infrastructure. It is no coincidence that the aforementioned flagrant law on ”indigenous peoples“ was adopted under the cover of large-scale NATO exercises in Ukraine.

This is also a disguise for the takeover of the rest of the Ukrainian economy and the exploitation of its natural resources. The sale of agricultural land is not far off, and it is obvious who will buy it up. From time to time, Ukraine is indeed given financial resources and loans, but under their own conditions and pursuing their own interests, with preferences and benefits for Western companies. By the way, who will pay these debts back? Apparently, it is assumed that this will have to be done not only by today's generation of Ukrainians but also by their children, grandchildren and probably great-grandchildren.

The Western authors of the anti-Russia project set up the Ukrainian political system in such a way that presidents, members of parliament and ministers would change but the attitude of separation from and enmity with Russia would remain. Reaching peace was the main election slogan of the incumbent president. He came to power with this. The promises turned out to be lies. Nothing has changed. And in some ways the situation in Ukraine and around Donbas has even degenerated.

In the anti-Russia project, there is no place either for a sovereign Ukraine or for the political forces that are trying to defend its real independence. Those who talk about reconciliation in Ukrainian society, about dialogue, about finding a way out of the current impasse are labelled as ”pro-Russian“ agents.

Again, for many people in Ukraine, the anti-Russia project is simply unacceptable. And there are millions of such people. But they are not allowed to raise their heads. They have had their legal opportunity to defend their point of view in fact taken away from them. They are intimidated, driven underground. Not only are they persecuted for their convictions, for the spoken word, for the open expression of their position, but they are also killed. Murderers, as a rule, go unpunished.

Today, the ”right“ patriot of Ukraine is only the one who hates Russia. Moreover, the entire Ukrainian statehood, as we understand it, is proposed to be further built exclusively on this idea. Hate and anger, as world history has repeatedly proved this, are a very shaky foundation for sovereignty, fraught with many serious risks and dire consequences.

All the subterfuges associated with the anti-Russia project are clear to us. And we will never allow our historical territories and people close to us living there to be used against Russia. And to those who will undertake such an attempt, I would like to say that this way they will destroy their own country.

The incumbent authorities in Ukraine like to refer to Western experience, seeing it as a model to follow. Just have a look at how Austria and Germany, the USA and Canada live next to each other. Close in ethnic composition, culture, in fact sharing one language, they remain sovereign states with their own interests, with their own foreign policy. But this does not prevent them from the closest integration or allied relations. They have very conditional, transparent borders. And when crossing them the citizens feel at home. They create families, study, work, do business. Incidentally, so do millions of those born in Ukraine who now live in Russia. We see them as our own close people.

Russia is open to dialogue with Ukraine and ready to discuss the most complex issues. But it is important for us to understand that our partner is defending its national interests but not serving someone else's, and is not a tool in someone else's hands to fight against us.

We respect the Ukrainian language and traditions. We respect Ukrainians' desire to see their country free, safe and prosperous.

I am confident that true sovereignty of Ukraine is possible only in partnership with Russia. Our spiritual, human and civilizational ties formed for centuries and have their origins in the same sources, they have been hardened by common trials, achievements and victories. Our kinship has been transmitted from generation to generation. It is in the hearts and the memory of people living in modern Russia and Ukraine, in the blood ties that unite millions of our families. Together we have always been and will be many times stronger and more successful. For we are one people.

Today, these words may be perceived by some people with hostility. They can be interpreted in many possible ways. Yet, many people will hear me. And I will say one thing – Russia has never been and will never be ”anti-Ukraine“. And what Ukraine will be – it is up to its citizens to decide.



////



Direct Line with Vladimir Putin
Event_Date: 30/6/2021
Event_Time: 15:50
Event_Place: Moscow

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Good afternoon.

We are broadcasting Direct Line with Vladimir Putin.

The moderators in this studio are Nailya Asker-zade…

Nailya Asker-zade: …and Yekaterina Berezovskaya.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Our colleagues, Tatyana Remezova and Natalya Yuryeva, are working with volunteers in the Message Processing Centre.

Last year we combined two projects, the annual news conference and Direct Line. The format of today’s event is different. The focus is on direct communication, only the President and the people, without unnecessary intermediaries.

Nailya Asker-zade: During today’s live broadcast, you will often hear about a special platform, the Moskva – Putinu mobile app. It is a kind of a guide or entry pass to this programme, which is available to everyone.

So, President of Russia Vladimir Putin is on the air.

Vladimir Putin: Good afternoon.

Natalya Yuryeva: We are in the Message Processing Centre, the heart of Direct Line. As you can see, right behind me an editor is processing a call. You can see the numbers for your calls and text messages on the screen.

The only way to personally address the President is via videoconference with the help of the Moskva – Putinu special mobile application, and the President will possibly answer your call.

Tatyana Remezova: Hard and meticulous work is underway in the Message Processing Centre. As of now, we have received nearly 2 million questions. Whatever many people say, telephone calls and text messages remain the most popular means of communication; together, they account for over a million questions. But many people are also making use of the Moskva – Putinu application, which has been downloaded over 650,000 times.

Just like last year, we are being assisted by volunteers. They have been working with the questions for a second week now, and many of the people’s problems have been settled even before this programme began.

Mr President, considering my experience at other Direct Lines, I can assume that you will be able to answer no more than 70 or 80 questions. What happens to other questions, as there are already nearly two million of them?

Vladimir Putin: I would also like to begin our current meeting with this, and here is what I would like to say.

In 2019, over one million questions were received when the Direct Line took place in this full format. And many hundreds of thousands of questions were asked last year when the Direct Line was combined with the Big News Conference. I would like to assure you – to make what would seem to be a self-assured statement, but, nevertheless, I would just like to say that we try to make sure that not a single question goes unnoticed.

As I have already mentioned, over one million questions were received in 2019. Over 500,000 questions have already been processed today, moreover, specific answers have been provided. Work continues on some of them because, to respond properly and positively, it is necessary to amend the regulatory framework and to include the resolution of these questions in regional budgets or even the federal budget.

It would be impossible to conduct this large-scale job without the assistance of the Russian Popular Front and other public organisations that have joined this work and cooperate very actively with administrations at various levels, including local, regional and federal, in order to help people.

This, of course, helps me because I receive all the questions. But I would now like to address the volunteers and people who are processing these questions, and I would like to thank them on behalf of the citizens because, of course, I receive the questions, but you help ordinary Russian citizens, and I would like to thank you very much for this.

I hope that we will organise the same productive work following today’s event, although I hope that we will be able to address the problems that interest people the most during our direct conversations, and we will try and resolve some of them during our current conversation.

Thank you very much.

Nailya Asker-zade: People with hearing impairments can watch a special sign-language version of our programme on the Public Television of Russia (OTR).

I suggest moving on to specific questions.

Of course, people are mostly concerned about the new COVID-19 wave. New virus mutations appear, and people want to know whether there are any clear rules. Why is it that the authorities stipulate an allegedly voluntary vaccination, while two-thirds of people working in certain sectors have to get vaccinated in Moscow and some other regions? Why are mass events allegedly banned but it is possible to hold the 2020 UEFA European Football Championship? What should be done so that governors, officials and ordinary citizens get to know what the exact rules are?

Vladimir Putin: This is very simple. As for the UEFA Euro 2021, of course, first of all, we had to fulfil the obligations that the state had assumed regarding hosting these major sporting events.

But, in general, it is very simple to understand what is happening in this sphere. All you need to do is have a look at the law. As you may recall, I once said that I do not support mandatory vaccination, and I continue to adhere to this point of view. We need to look at the law of, I believe, 1998, about the immune protection of the population which comprises two main parts – a national immunisation schedule, which is mandatory, this vaccination is mandatory. Some of our colleagues suggested transferring vaccination against the coronavirus infection to this nationwide immunisation schedule, the nationwide programme. But the State Duma deputies did not support this motion, so, COVID vaccination did not make it to this section of the nationwide vaccination programme and is not mandatory nationwide.

However, the second part of this law says that in the event of an increase in the number of cases and in the event of an epidemic in separate regions of the Russian Federation and upon the recommendation of chief sanitary doctors, regional heads can introduce mandatory vaccination for certain groups of people, especially risk groups. The heads of 10 constituent entities of the Russian Federation used this regulation to introduce mandatory vaccination for certain risk groups. This was carried out under the 1998 law.

Therefore, there is no confusion in Russia, and everyone is acting in accordance with the law that I just mentioned.

Nailya Asker-zade: So, there will be no nationwide lockdown, right?

Vladimir Putin: This is a different question. Our colleagues’ efforts in 10 regions aim to prevent the need for a lockdown, when entire enterprises are shut down and people find themselves out of work or without income; small and medium-sized businesses go bankrupt and individual incomes decline. Certain regions introduced these mandatory vaccination-related rules for certain groups of the population to prevent this from happening.

As you are aware, experts have already mentioned this many times on television, online and in many media outlets, on all television channels, that vaccination is the only way to put an end to further spread of the pandemic. We can do this since we have four high-tech, safe and very effective vaccines. So, I hope some of our citizens who are still biased about the vaccines will change their minds as the vaccination continues. Over 20 million – I believe, 23 million people – have been vaccinated. As you can see, everything is okay and, thankfully, we do not have any tragic vaccination side effects as is the case with AstraZeneca or Pfizer.

Nailya Asker-zade: You have reassured me regarding the lockdown.

Vladimir Putin: I hope so.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Mr President, we know that you know about the vaccine from your personal experience, and you have become an example for the whole country. However, we have a question. If I may, I will read a text message we have received.

Vladimir Putin: Please do.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: “Tell us the truth: Did the President get vaccinated or not? Why is there no video?”

Other people are asking which vaccine you received; there are many similar questions. Everyone wants to know.

Vladimir Putin: I see.

I was indeed asked not to reveal which vaccine I received so as not to give it a competitive advantage. But I can see that there are very many questions regarding this.

As for the video, I do not believe that showing it is so important. What if you receive the jab not in the arm but in some other part of the body? Would I be obliged to show the video nevertheless?

Look, there are many crooks around who pretend to be getting vaccinated. Regrettably, the medics often play along, making the shot with some unknown substance, maybe not even a medication.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Just saline?

Vladimir Putin: Yes, just saline or nothing at all.

I hope that the majority of our people understand that when I say that I have taken the jab this is indeed so. I believe that cheating is unacceptable at this level.

As for me, when I got the shot back in February, there were only two vaccines available commercially: EpiVacCorona from the Vektor Centre in Novosibirsk and Sputnik V, as you know. Both vaccines are good. The third one was barely created then and was not available commercially at the time.

Of course, I could have taken any of them. But, strange as it may seem to some people, I did not even consult the doctors. I just looked at what shots my acquaintances had received. As I said, both vaccines are good and modern. The one from the Vektor Centre is wholly synthetic and, as they say, more advanced. But as I could see from the example of my acquaintances – maybe I should not say this, but I nevertheless want to explain my reasoning – the duration of effect of the Vektor vaccine is a bit shorter, although it has other advantages, such as the absence of any side effects at all, specifically fever or any other side effects. But I believed that I needed to be protected for as long as possible, and so I chose to be vaccinated with Sputnik V, especially considering that the military are getting vaccinated with Sputnik V, and I am their Supreme Commander, after all.

I have already talked about this, but I can repeat. I did not feel anything after the first jab, only slightly sore in the shoulder after about four hours. I had my second jab at noon and took my temperature at midnight, it was 37.2. I went to bed and when I woke up it was 36.6. That was it. In about 20 days, I think, I had a blood test that showed that I had a high level of protection. I recommend you do the same.

Did you get vaccinated?

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: No, actually. I had COVID-19 not so long ago; it is too early to do it. The Healthcare Ministry recently issued recommendations on vaccination for those who have had COVID-19. If I am not mistaken, they should wait six to 12 months for their natural antibodies to wane.

Nailya Asker-zade: There is time to think.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Now things are clear.

Vladimir Putin: You know, the Healthcare Ministry issued its recommendations, and the World Health Organisation also released its guidelines, only a few days ago.

Normally, when there is no pandemic, it is recommended to get revaccinated in 12 months but when there is a peak or rising morbidity, it is recommended to get inoculated again in six months. These are WHO recommendations.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: My time will be in the autumn, then.

Vladimir Putin: Was it mild?

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Yes, I would say so. But what we see on the news and online, so many stories are just terrifying.

Vladimir Putin: People get infected even after they have had the vaccine, in about 10 percent of cases. However, they recover fast and with no serious consequences, which is important. This is what matters, I think. Without a vaccine, this illness may result in quite severe long-term consequences. That is why you, too, should watch your health and go through rehabilitation, if necessary.

Nailya Asker-zade: After hearing your account, many will probably decide they just want Sputnik V – but not everybody. Vaccine hesitancy is explainable: people have doubts about the effectiveness of the vaccines. Do they protect against new strains? You probably know that some people have still fallen ill after getting vaccinated and the incidence rate among such people is high.

Vladimir Putin: Yes, I have just mentioned that, about 10 percent, on average. Again, in their case, the illness is mild. Some very famous people have become ill even after getting the vaccine. I do not want to disclose names. After all, it is their private matter. But they are quite famous in Russia. Last week, one of my colleagues got ill. Yesterday I was told he was already back at work. Some people close to me were vaccinated too but still got the coronavirus, unfortunately. But they recovered fairly quickly and did not need any strong medication. I am talking about people in my immediate circle. What I am saying is vaccination makes sense.

I had meetings recently, as you may know, in the Kremlin, we were awarding the Hero of Labour stars and State Prizes to our scientists, including those who had invented the vaccine. Let me reiterate what I heard from them, they speak in public continually: the disease may take a severe turn, but what is worse, it might have remote consequences. This should certainly be considered.

You know there are, there have always been people who believe that no inoculations at all are needed. There are many people in this category.

Nailya Asker-zade: The anti-vaxers.

Vladimir Putin: And not only anti-vax dissidents, there are enough of them both in this country and elsewhere.

What is happening in the world? What are specialists saying? When a sweeping vaccination campaign against the main infections is afoot, it seems that everything is fine and there is no need, as some people believe, to get vaccinated. “Why get a jab? Almost no one is sick.” But as soon as the vaccination level drops to a certain threshold – bang, all of a sudden there is an outbreak and everyone is scrambling to get vaccinated as soon as possible.

We should take our cue from the specialists, not people who do not know much about this matter and listen to rumours. After all, this is happening all around the world. You know, the things I heard: that there is nothing at all, that in reality there is no epidemic. Sometimes I listen to what some people are saying – they seem to be grown-up, educated people. I do not know where they are taking this from. When you tell them that this is happening all over the world, they reply: “Right, country leaders have come into collusion.” Do they have any idea of what is happening in the world, of the contradictions that are plaguing today’s world, where all leaders allegedly upped and conspired with each other? It is all absolute rubbish.

Nailya Asker-zade: But some people believe that the virus has been artificially created.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: This is a point for discussion to this day, a very active discussion, by the way.

Vladimir Putin: This is a different matter: artificial or non-artificial. The question is, how to get protection from it? Wait, like you, until taken ill and then feel cheerful and merry? You are a very young person and in good form, but there are people with a different constitution, with chronic ailments and advanced in age. These are the so-called risk groups, let me repeat it once again. This is dangerous, a danger to life, while being vaccinated is not dangerous. We have not had a single serious complication, nothing: I had a fever of 37.2 [Celsius]. So what? True, my daughter (she was also vaccinated with Sputnik V) had a temperature of 37.5.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: This is also normal.

Vladimir Putin: Also, for just one day, and that was all, nothing more.

Nailya Asker-zade: Let me go over how our work today will be organised.

We have received 2 million appeals, and people continue to write, call and send messages. We collect them and group them by topic. Please note that these are the main topics of people’s appeals. We can choose any, for example, Communications and Internet, and find out what our viewers are interested in.

Vladimir Putin: Ok.

Nailya Asker-zade: Or, for example, healthcare. Of course, everyone is interested in how the fight against COVID is being organised, how the vaccination is going, primary care and availability of medications.

Vladimir Putin: Please pick the one you like best.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Mr President, let us focus on the sub-topic “Vaccination and fighting COVID.” Please note that the federal districts are shown at the bottom of the screen. We can choose any and see the cities from which people are sending their questions.

Vladimir Putin: Yes, please.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Please also note that we have different types of appeals: some are in video format, others are written text, and there will also be telephone calls and live broadcasts. I propose launching a video call from Moscow. Shall we?

Vladimir Putin: Yes, please, any one of them.

Yevgeny Tsvetkov: Yevgeny Tsvetkov, Moscow.

Vladimir Putin: Good afternoon, Yevgeny.

Yevgeny Tsvetkov: My wife is a teacher at a Moscow school and has a medical exemption due to a long-standing chronic illness. However, the head of the school does not accept this exemption and wants her to bring a vaccination certificate by July 15. My wife cannot comply, but if she does not, they say they will fire her. Is that legal at all?

Vladimir Putin: I can tell you right away that this is illegal. If there is a medical exemption, no one can ask a person to take the vaccine. I think that the head of the school where your wife works is unaware of this. I hope that he or she hears this and lifts these illegal demands.

Nailya Asker-zade: Let's continue to take questions on this topic.

I see we have a message from Omsk. A person, who had recovered from the coronavirus, was discharged from the hospital and was told that free rehab was available at one of three institutions. One of them had run out of places, and the other one asked for a payment of 50,000 rubles for the service. What do you have to say to this person who recovered from the coronavirus? I was ill as well, and I know that patients need some rehab time.

Vladimir Putin: Yes, this is true, and we are now busy trying to organise this. Actually, there has never been any rehabilitation system as a factor of improving health after illnesses in Russia.

Nailya Asker-zade: But we had health resorts back during the Soviet era, did we not?

Vladimir Putin: Yes, we had health resorts, and we still have them. Incidentally, they usually worked as holiday hotels or ordinary hotels. But this was back in the Soviet times, when we had many things and did not have many others.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: We did not have COVID.

Nailya Asker-zade: Yes, there was no COVID, thankfully.

Vladimir Putin: But there were other diseases. Incidentally, the vaccination system was quite strict in the Soviet Union, nearly all vaccinations were mandatory. Did anyone ask the parents’ permission when their children were vaccinated at schools? Nobody did, everyone was vaccinated.

Nailya Asker-zade: Were you vaccinated like that too?

Vladimir Putin: Yes, of course, why not? I was from a simple workers’ family. My parents were workers. Who asked them? Nobody did. And nobody asked me either. We were simply lined up in the school’s medical room, were given our jabs just like that and off we went. But we had stability when it came to combating infections. After the Soviet Union collapsed, the social system almost disintegrated as well, including in the areas we are discussing now.

We will now invest some serious money; funds have been earmarked in this rehabilitation system, and we will shortly sign contracts for the delivery of the necessary equipment. The trouble is that special equipment is necessary for post-coronavirus rehabilitation, because COVID hits the vascular and respiratory systems, as well as other organs. We are allocating these funds; they are being transferred right now, and we will start working on this project.

As for any paid services, I do not know the reasons for this, but, as I have already mentioned, this case must be looked into. We will do so, if the required information is available.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: If you wish, we can contact the person who asked this question. He is from Omsk.

Vladimir Putin: Yes, let us do it.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: We will do this later during the programme. We can do this.

Nailya Asker-zade: Let us move on now to the Message Processing Centre.

Vladimir Putin: Anyway, the funds for the creation of a post-coronavirus rehabilitation system have been allocated, and the system is being established.

Nailya Asker-zade: We are moving to the Message Processing Centre. Natalya Yuryeva, go ahead please.

Natalya Yuryeva: Our Message Processing Centre is being literally bombarded with questions. There are almost two million questions. Let us find out where people are calling from. For example, I see a message from Moscow. The person who wrote it has not yet introduced himself. Naturally, there are plenty of questions about vaccination. I know that there is one video question. Where from?

Remark: From Moscow.

Natalya Yuryeva: It is also from Moscow. From Yekaterina Kachailova. Let us see a video she sent us.

Vladimir Putin: Go ahead please.

Yekaterina Kachailova: Good afternoon, Mr President.

I planned to be vaccinated against COVID-19 but unfortunately, doctors at vaccination centres could not tell me if my illnesses were contraindications for getting a jab. I can check my temperature and blood pressure at home as well, and, of course, I would not go for a jab if I feel sick.

Could you please tell me where I can get qualified aid and an answer to my question: What are the risks and consequences of this jab? Thank you for your help and answer.

Vladimir Putin: Katya, the answer is very simple. It is out in the open. If you have some illnesses, chronic or recent, you do know about them. You are bound to visit your doctor, a specialist who monitors you as a patient. This is the doctor you should address. He must tell you whether you should get a jab or not. Nothing is easier.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: As far as I understand it, she did not get an answer to this question.

Vladimir Putin: No. However, she said she asked about it at vaccination centres where they may not necessarily know the answer. Who works there? Medical nurses and the like. But probably this is a question for narrow specialists who monitor their patients. It is necessary to ask them whether a jab is all right or not. They must know the answer.

Nailya Asker-zade: I suggest returning to the call centre. Do you have more calls or messages?

Alexander Maksimov: Good afternoon, Mr President.

Vladimir Putin: Hello.

Alexander Maksimov: My name is Sasha Maksimov. I study in the third form of school No. 2070 in Moscow. We will start a new academic year in two months. Please tell us how it will be: at a school desk or at home? Thank you.

Vladimir Putin: Sasha, I cannot give a definitive answer to your question because we do not know how the coronavirus situation will develop in the country and in the place where you live.

That said, the question is clear, but most likely, children in junior forms will go to school. After all, we hardly ever shut them down during the worst times of the past year, spring and summer. So, most probably, for elementary school, the academic process will be organised in the usual format.

As for the senior school, as I have already said, this will depend on specific circumstances. But I hope that we will eventually reach the level of herd immunity we are talking about, in part, owing to active vaccination, which will allow schools and universities as well as small, medium-sized and large businesses to operate as usual.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Mr President, we understand that you are now immune to the coronavirus and, probably, to some unfriendly countries.

We have received the following question as an SMS message via the number 04040 from Igor Oboimov in Moscow: Why is Ukraine not listed among these unfriendly countries? Here is another message on the same subject: Will you meet with President Zelensky?

Vladimir Putin: Why is Ukraine not listed among unfriendly countries? This is because I do not regard Ukraine as a country unfriendly towards Russia. I have noted many times, and I can repeat once again that, in my opinion, Ukrainians and Russians are a single people.

See for yourself: The Jews come to Israel from Africa, Europe, and other countries. Black people arrive from Africa, right? Those arriving from Europe speak Yiddish, rather than Hebrew. Although they are diverse, the Jewish people, nevertheless, cherishes its unity.

Well, Israel is far away. We have the Mordvins, one of Russia’s indigenous ethnic groups. This people is subdivided into the Erzya, Moksha and Shoksha ethnic groups, and there are three other ethnic groups. However, all of them consider themselves part of the Mordvin people. Although they speak the language of one ethnic group, the Erzya and the Moksha do not understand each other. Their respective languages are more different than the Russian and Ukrainian languages, but they cherish their unity. There are several reasons why. First, they are smart, and they realise that a breakup yields no positive results and simply weakens an ethnic group. There are also external factors to consider. What do I mean? Since the Middle Ages, efforts have always been made to divide and break up the Russian people. Rzeczpospolita launched this policy because Poland itself wanted to become a great power. Consequently, it tried to split up all nearby ethnic groups around itself. Austro-Hungary continued this policy in the run-up to World War I. But we have to understand this.

How did this country interpret ethnic aspects in the past? There were the Great Russians, the White Russians and the Little Russians. Sometime later, they started dividing the single Russian people under the influence of external factors, and the Bolsheviks also contributed to this process. Unfortunately, we cannot discuss this matter in great detail. By the way, I have thought it over, I will write a separate analytical article, and I will set forth my view of this subject. And I hope that people in Russia and Ukraine will read it.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Because people just do not know many things, do not know the history.

Vladimir Putin: Of course, people have no interest in that; they are living in a world of their own. But this is important for all of us.

So, I do not regard the Ukraine people unfriendly. Nothing of the kind. Russians and Ukrainians are a single people. But the Ukrainian leadership, the current authorities of modern Ukraine are clearly unfriendly to us. This is perfectly obvious. Otherwise there is no explanation for the draft law submitted by the Ukrainian President to the Verkhovna Rada, the law on indigenous peoples under which Russians are not an indigenous people in that territory. It defies comprehension. Russians have lived there for centuries, and now they have been declared as non-indigenous people. What can this lead to? As a result, part of these people could emigrate. But where would they go? They have flats, jobs and so on in Ukraine. And so they will have to reregister [as Ukrainians], because they would be second-class citizens otherwise. This would reduce the overall number of Russians. This effect will be comparable to the negative impact of weapons of mass destruction. This is serious. This is pushing the Russian language out of everyday life.

You see, there are narrow-minded people and far-right nationalists everywhere; they exist in Russia and also in Ukraine. They are acting in all sincerity, but not wisely. The results of their activities will be destructive. This also concerns the suppression of the opposition in Ukraine.

Viktor Medvedchuk, whom I regard as a Ukrainian nationalist, was seized and confined to his apartment ahead of the election campaign, and they also ordered him to wear an electronic bracelet. Absolutely illegal and unconstitutional decisions have been taken. But nobody is paying any attention to this. This shows people in the country that there are no legal opportunities for the forces which want to develop and strengthen their country, including by developing normal relations with Russia, that they have no chance. They are nipped in the bud: some are jailed, others are placed under house arrest, and still others are simply killed in the street.

Why meet with Zelensky if he has accepted the full external management of his country? The main issues concerning Ukraine’s functioning are not decided in Kiev but in Washington and, partly, in Berlin and Paris. What is there to talk about then?

Nevertheless, I do not refuse to hold such meetings, but I first want to understand what issues we can discuss.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Mr President, our editors tell me that we have Yevgeny Tsvetkov on the phone. He is the one who told us about his wife, who is facing dismissal for refusing to get vaccinated because of a medical exemption.

Vladimir Putin: Yes, please.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Ecxuse me, but let us first take another call on a related subject, post-COVID rehabilitation.

Vladimir Putin: Fine.

Nailya Asker-zade: Vladimir Vasilkov from Omsk. The caller is unavailable.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: We did not get through the first time, but I think we will reach him during the programme.

Vladimir Putin: Maybe we will get back to this subject later.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Yes, certainly.

Nailya Asker-zade: Let us get back to the Message Processing Centre. Tatyana, do you hear us?

Tatyana Remezova: Yes, colleagues, I do, thanks a lot.

We have already processed tens of thousands of questions, analysing them and calling people back to ask for details. The top five most popular subjects include the economy and price hikes. If you enter the word “price” or “prices” into the question database, you get tens of thousands of questions.

Vladimir Putin: I see.

Tatyana Remezova: I can see that one of the video addresses was recorded in a grocery store. Let us see it.

Vladimir Putin: Yes, please.

Question: Mr President, tell us, please, why bananas from Ecuador – here is the price – are cheaper that carrots grown in neighbouring regions – this is the price tag. Another question is about potatoes: why are they so expensive? How can people, for example, my mother, who lives on a subsistence wage, survive with such food prices? Does anyone control prices in Russia, or do they just appear out of the blue? That is, do people simply think up a figure and then write it on the price tag?

Nailya Asker-zade: If I got it right, carrots cost 110 rubles per kilo and bananas, 70 rubles.

Yekaterina Berezovskya: And butter costs 500–600 rubles.

Vladimir Putin: Look, the global food price indices are the highest in 10 years. Regrettably, this is a global trend; food prices are increasing everywhere.

Of course, this affects us as well, considering that Russia is part of the global economy. There are many reasons for these increases; I will not list all of them, but they include the printing of currency by the main currency issuing countries, the consequences of the coronavirus, the decline in production and jobs, and so on and so forth.

We had the biggest price increases on food last year and early this year. Sugar increased the most, up 41 percent. Sunflower oil followed in its wake.

You probably know what the Government and we said about this. The Government made a number of decisions to control food prices.

Regarding these measures, the first was an agreement between producers and retail networks. The second was subsidies for producers of the final product for the purchase of raw materials at high prices. Later, export duty increases were introduced on foreign trade. Other regulation measures are being discussed, so in general the state is tracking this problem, though maybe sometimes the response is delayed. I spoke about this problem at one of the meetings with the Government. Let me repeat that the above measures are being taken.

Now regarding butter: you said 500–600. Prices on milk are generally stable and, as you know, butter is made from milk. This is why prices on that have increased between 3.5 to 5 percent recently. I would like to emphasise that this is below the inflation rate because the inflation has almost reached 6 percent, 5.9 percent, to be exact. So, this is less than the inflation rate.

That said, there are problems in this respect. This is what I think Valentina was talking about – the so-called borsch basket: carrots, potatoes, etc.

Nailya Asker-zade: She asked why bananas cost less than carrots.

Vladimir Putin: Just a moment. Not only carrots but also potatoes. This is because we ran out of some domestic products. Last year, we produced over 19 million tonnes of potatoes. This year we will have about 22 million – I hope this is more than enough. That is a million tonnes we missed. They bring vegetables not from a next-door region but usually from abroad, from Belarus, or Turkey where it is warmer. Naturally, in this context it is important to look at logistics. How much will it cost with this kind of shipping, and so on.

Naturally, we must keep an eye on this as well, but let me say again that we will soon take in the vegetable harvest, and I hope it will affect prices. That said, the development of agriculture also includes vegetables and fruit, but now we are not fully meeting domestic demand for them.

For instance, we have practically resolved the problem of chicken meat and pork. We produce enough to meet domestic demand and even export them. In fact, we export a lot. By the way, last year agriculture made a record $30 billion on exports, over $30 billion. This has never happened before.

Incidentally, a decision was also made on grain with a view to curbing prices on bread and bakery products inside the country by introducing export quotas and export customs duties.

Recent price hikes on bakery products and sunflower oil have been a mere 0.1 percent. Prices on sugar have also increased by about 0.1 percent. In other words, regulating measures are being taken and are resulting in the desired effect but, unfortunately, not on all food items. We will press on.

Nailya Asker-zade: I suggest we get back to the topic of agriculture a bit later because we have finally gotten through to Omsk.

Vladimir Vasilkov. Let us have this call on air.

Vladimir Putin: Of course.

Vladimir Vasilkov: Hello.

I worked for more than 40 years and was awarded the title of Omsk Region Labour Veteran. I recently received a small increase in my pension but the Labour Veteran title was withdrawn along with my benefits. They used to pay me 550 rubles, which was at least something, and now I am nobody. It was a slap in the face. And I know more people like me.

Nailya Asker-zade: Excuse me, but your question was about your COVID-19 recovery and the rehabilitation you need.

Vladimir Vasilkov: Yes, that is another question that I have.

Vladimir Putin: Go ahead, please, Mr Vasilkov.

As concerns the Labour Veteran title, I know that, unfortunately, it has been an issue in the regions. It is up to regional authorities to award the Labour Veteran title and to withdraw it. I think it absolutely unjustified. They should not take away what has already been given.

Vladimir Vasilkov: I am not the only one.

Vladimir Putin: I know and I believe that this decision was wrong. That is my opinion and I hope Omsk will hear me. There is a general rule, which is stipulated by the Constitution, no less: you cannot deprive people of the benefits they already have. This aspect of the matter must be reviewed carefully by officials at all levels.

Nailya Asker-zade: As I promised, shall we get back to the topic of agriculture?

Vladimir Putin: Yes, of course.

Nailya Asker-zade: Let us see what questions arecoming in from those who till the land, as they say. What shall we choose? Let us go to Ufa. Here is a message: “All the crops are dying due to drought in Bashkiria. Cattle are dying. Irrigation services used to be available. This is a global problem. Please look into this. When will irrigation services be available again?”

Vladimir Putin: First of all, I want to say that we are proud of our agricultural workers and their results. I have already said that even their export results are outstanding, no less. Productivity and production are growing fast. Vegetable and fruit cultivation could be better, but additional support is necessary.

Overall, support for the agricultural sector is quite substantial, around 350 billion rubles. We support other areas as well. For example, we will allocate 35 billion for the social development of rural areas. We also allocate 70 billion every year for farmland reclamation. That is 70 billion every year for this purpose.

Irrigation services are part of these efforts. We allocate more than 7 billion a year for this purpose and will continue to do so. Irrigation is very important, considering climate change. We will be ramping up these efforts across all the areas I have just mentioned.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Mr President, to follow up on agriculture, I would like to quote a few text messages. “Mr President, they say there will be a tax on livestock. Is it true?” someone from the Rostov Region is asking. In fact, not everyone is aware that there may be such a thing as a tax on livestock.

Nailya Asker-zade: Horned livestock.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Yes, horned livestock. As far as I understand, agricultural producers have been exempted.

And one more follow-up question from Izrail Murzabekov in Ingushetia, who engages in selective sheep breeding. He is asking for help with the lease of land and writes the following: “Any kind of land, even wasteland, at least something.”

Vladimir Putin: Where does he live?

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Nazran, Ingushetia.

Vladimir Putin: Ok. With regard to help, I will definitely have a word with the head of the republic. Land in the North Caucasus is worth a lot; it really is a valuable asset. But since this person engages in real business, an important business – selective breeding, right? Sheep breeding?

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Yes, selective sheep breeding.

Vladimir Putin: This is very important. This is something that we have been increasingly focused on lately. It is true of seeds and livestock. This is critically important. We are only taking the first steps in this direction.

We have resolved the chicken meat problem, but not everyone is aware – no, this is a serious matter – that we mainly import eggs in order to raise chickens. We need to have our own eggs to begin with. The same applies to cattle and sheep breeding.

To reiterate, we are moving forward towards this goal. Of course, people who engage in this business deserve special support. I will definitely have a word with the head of the republic.

The first part of your question was…

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: The first part of the question was about the tax on livestock. Is it true that…

Vladimir Putin: We should impose a tax on those who spread such rumours. No, no one is going to impose any tax on livestock.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: People are worried. This question comes from the village of Chaltyr, Rostov Region, apparently, a small place.

Vladimir Putin: I hope that I will be heard not only in the Rostov Region, but other regions of the Russian Federation as well.

Nailya Asker-zade: Most importantly, the Finance Ministry should hear you.

Vladimir Putin: No, no, no. Take my word for it, no one is planning anything like that. These are just rumours.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Mr President, I suggest we move on. The Economy section has a sub-section called Industry and Production. Let us see if we have received any messages or calls on this topic.

Troitsk is on the line, we have a video call, that is, people can go on the air. And Nizhny Novgorod is also calling.

Vladimir Putin: Go ahead, please.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Which one will we choose?

Vladimir Putin: It does not matter.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Let us listen to Troitsk.

Vladimir Putin: Troitsk – where is it?

Nailya Asker-zade: It is in Moscow’s immediate suburbs.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Hello, you are on the air.

Vladimir Putin: Good day, Svetlana.

Svetlana Mironova: Mr President, good day.

Here is my question. My name is Svetlana Mironova. I want to ask about the surging prices of building materials. I will give you an example: my family lives in a small flat of 33 square metres. The children are growing and now there is not enough room for everyone, so this year we planned to improve our living conditions. We bought a plot of land and started to think about building a house. I will use the fence as an example: three or four months ago it cost about 150,000 [rubles]. Today we will have to fork out 260,000 for a fence made of ordinary corrugated iron. It is quite a sum for our family. We want to understand – my family and those families who have found themselves in the same situation – if prices will remain the same or if they will increase or, maybe, with your assistance, they will be more affordable to us. Thank you.

Vladimir Putin: Hopefully, I can also help to make them affordable. I will explain what I mean.

First, of course, this was caused by inflation and the price increases in the consumer market across the board. The inflation rate in our country has gone up to 5.9 percent, or almost 6 percent, from about 4 percent. Of course, our objective is to push it down. That is why the Central Bank has increased slightly its key interest rate to avoid an excessive money supply in the economy.

I believe the current inflation rate will get back to its target indicator – 4 percent. This year, we will hardly achieve this, but I believe we will be able to bring it [the inflation rate] down to 5 percent and, generally, make sure that inflation holds steady at this level, yet, thinking of making it lower. This is my first point.

Secondly, regarding the reasons behind it, in my view, there will be more questions like this during our meeting today. This was caused by the changes in the situation in many world markets for commodities, in particular, metals.

Prices on metals have increased sharply on world markets. Incidentally, this includes foodstuffs. Prices on sugar went up on world markets and so our producers began selling it abroad. As a result, we had a shortage of sugar, and prices jumped. The same happened with metals. Metal prices increased on world markets. Here, they are trying to raise them to global levels, and so everything linked with this instantly gets more expensive.

Action is being taken now to curb prices on these basic goods, which includes construction goods. I hope this will affect you as well. We know all this and are taking the necessary steps to keep the situation stable.

By the way, maybe this is worth considering: are you selling your flat or are you keeping it?

Svetlana Mironova: We would like to keep it, of course.

Vladimir Putin: For those who are selling their flats, people have probably noticed this, but I would still like to repeat once again. I recently talked about this at the United Russia congress: if a person sells a flat within five years and buys a new one, he has to pay personal income tax. Considering growing housing prices, people were losing a fair amount of money. They could have at least made a down payment.

I suggested then that if a person buys a new flat within a year, he should not pay this tax when selling his flat. This may concern you less, but it has a direct bearing on all those who want to improve their housing conditions by selling their old flat and buying a new one. I believe this is how it will be. We will work to stabilise the situation in the construction market as well.

There are a number of other measures, but we will discuss them later. They are related to infrastructure loans, utilities loans and the like, but I believe that together these measures should promote stabilisation in the construction market.

In the meantime, I would like to wish you success. I hope you will manage to carry out your plans. I would like to wish your family and you personally all the best.

Svetlana Mironova: I was happy to see you.

Vladimir Putin: The pleasure is mine.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Thank you, Svetlana.

Mr President, besides our TV viewers, your colleagues in the Government are obviously listening to us.

Vladimir Putin: I am 100 percent sure.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: We just received a message. Tatyana Golikova said that not even 10 percent (you noted that 10 percent of vaccinated people could fall sick after a jab) but more like 2.5 percent could get it again. Whom should we believe?

Vladimir Putin: Thank you. Ms Golikova, of course, because she is dealing with this professionally every day. She was the Healthcare Minister and knows what she is talking about.

Nailya Asker-zade: Let us read a question that was texted to us: “Why not have the governors hold direct lines like you do, annually or quarterly? That would reduce the number of questions for the President.”

By the way, heads of some regions, such as Moscow, Tatarstan and St Petersburg, to name a few, are already doing so, mainly through social media.

Vladimir Putin: I think this would do no harm to anyone, because direct communication is important not only because people have the opportunity to ask the head of state or region questions. What is more important – and I have said this many times – is that the most pressing issues that concern our citizens are selected in the process. This is critically important in order to fine tune our practical moves in the most important areas such as social policy, healthcare, housing construction, etc. That is why I would encourage regional leaders, my colleagues, to listen to what our citizens have to say.

Nailya Asker-zade: Occasionally, even simple issues cannot be resolved without the President or the Governor. It happens.

Vladimir Putin: It does. Perhaps, we should strive to make sure that things get addressed automatically, but we still have a long way to go. In any case, this feedback is always very helpful.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Mr President, speaking of feedback, if your colleagues could spend more time talking to the people, they would hear questions, including those coming from small and medium-sized businesses. Clearly, this year is difficult for everyone, and this segment was hit hard, but at the same time it received support. Just several days ago, you instructed the Government to exempt small businesses in the catering sector from VAT.

Vladimir Putin: Yes, but under certain conditions: there must be receipts for everything, so that everything is transparent, not just their services, but there should also be receipts for the goods that they purchase and use in their work and this should be transparent.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Let us hear what the businesspeople have to say about this. Let us hear from Surgut, which has also joined us on this direct line.

Vladimir Putin: Please, go ahead.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Please, you are on the air. Mr Kharlov, can you hear us?

Vladimir Putin: We are listening to you.

Maxim Kharlov: Good afternoon, Mr President.

Vladimir Putin: Good afternoon, Maxim.

Maxim Kharlov: Here is my question. As a representative of the business community, I have repeatedly applied for financial support – loans for expanding my business – but the terms offered by the lending institution preclude effective development. The interest rates are high, 18 percent and up, and loan terms are under three years, that is, very short, and they also want collateral. These terms preclude obtaining any effective financial support and prevent the channeling of funds into business expansion and, as a result, the development of entrepreneurs who can become the driving force of our economy.

Hence, the question: is the Government considering effective support for entrepreneurs in the following matters – extending lending terms, lowering interest rates and decreasing collateral requirements? I am talking about loans to finance working capital. The amounts are small, anywhere from 5 to 10 million, which a micro business may need. This is my question.

Vladimir Putin: Mr Kharlov, this is not an idle question, I understand you perfectly well. Small and medium-sized businesses, small enterprises, micro businesses, and providing them with funding are critically important matters. Of course, the pandemic hit small and medium-sized businesses hardest. We are aware of this as well. But please note that we, the Government, have taken a package of measures to support small and medium-sized businesses, including loans at zero percent or 2 percent with subsequent repayment of these loans, if the number of employees remained unchanged, loan term extension, cutting tax rates, including social contributions, in half. This is a major package of measures.

The things you are talking about are also important, I understand you perfectly. But organising this kind of work, say, collateral-free loans, is a delicate matter. After all, it is not difficult to apply for a loan. But how do you pay it back? This could undermine our financial and banking system. Although, of course, the banks enjoy big revenues. Thankfully, our financial system is stable, which is very good. But making decisions that could, in fact, rock this financial platform is also, clearly, a dangerous approach.

You said they are asking for 18 percent now, correct? That is too much, I agree, because the average rate is currently 12 percent for small businesses and microlending. There are preferential terms as well. I am not sure if anyone has ever offered them to you. Look, we have easy-term lending. What is that about? The Central Bank key rate is 5.5 percent currently, I believe, plus 2.75 percent on top of this key rate; 5.5 and 2.75 add up to 8.25, if I have it right. That is much better than 18 or even 12 percent.

Last year, in order to ensure this kind of work, we made available – and people received – a trillion rubles from budget sources. That sounds like a lot of money, but it is absolutely not enough if you think about the needs in this sector of the economy.

Mr Kharlov, we will, of course, continue to expand this system. It is a matter of budgetary capacity or budgetary constraints, on the other hand. But 18 is a bit too much. If you leave your details, your contact information…

Nailya Asker-zade: We have that.

Vladimir Putin: Our colleagues have your contact information. We will take a look at the banks you have contacted and the tools that you, in my opinion, could use, and the bank should have helped you do that.

Good luck.

Nailya Asker-zade: Let us move on to another topic – defence and security.

Vladimir Putin: Fine.

Nailya Asker-zade: This must be a very important question because there could not be unimportant questions in the section.

Let us see. Here is, for example, a video from Krasnoyarsk. Shall we watch it?

Vladimir Putin: Yes, please.

Lyubov Shendeleva: Hello, Mr President.

Vladimir Putin: Hello.

Lyubov Shendeleva: My name is Lyubov Shendeleva, I live in Krasnoyarsk and I am a pensioner.

My question, I believe, is important to many people. For how long will telephone scammers, taking advantage of their impunity, as well as people’s gullibility, be stripping them of the little money they have?

Posing as bank clerks or employees at any other organisation, they take money from the most vulnerable section of the population, that is pensioners and senior citizens.

When exposed, they even start sending messages with threats. How long is this going to last? I believe there are some technical means that can help track them down and punish them. We are asking you for protection. Thank you for your attention.

Nailya Asker-zade: A problem like this does exist in many regions. Here is another example. Sitting next to you at the Victory Day parade was Vasily Pronin. You exchanged a few words with him and straightened his jacket. A few days later, scammers stole 400,000 rubles from him. So, this problem is common in many regions. Vasily Pronin is 96 years old.

Vladimir Putin: I do not even want to comment on this. They are just rogues. People committing such crimes, targeting elderly people, war veterans, are simply rogues. Of course, we need to fight this. Unfortunately, crimes of this sort are on the rise and the growth is significant. Whereas the overall situation with fighting socially harmful, grave crimes in our country is satisfactory, and we have even seen some decline, there has been an increase – a significant increase of 25 percent – in crimes like those mentioned.

What are the reasons for them? In my opinion, the first thing that creates an unfavourable background and is contributing to the increase in crimes like these are illegal sales of personal data. Of course, the government and law-enforcement agencies must address this issue very seriously. Criminals use illegally obtained personal data, big data, to act.

Several questions here require special attention.

First, this is largely the competence of the Central Bank. They should be more active in countering phishing sites. As I see it, these phishing websites probably stem from the word “fish.”

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: A phishing site imitates the real one.

Vladimir Putin: They are looking for their victims in the net. Previously, it took the Central Bank several weeks and even months to locate such sites and shut them down. Now it does so in three days. But even this is not enough. It must be more active. This is the first point.

The second point. Commercial banks, the accounts in which money comes in or goes out, must meticulously monitor these processes to reduce to zero the opportunities for scammers.

That said, we must take into account the fact mentioned by Ms Shendeleva, that scammers are also involved in social engineering, where social services operate and often act on their behalf. People must simply bear this in mind and be very attentive in this respect.

There are also issues that are at the junction of competence of law enforcement bodies and the Central Bank. What are these issues? What is at odds?

On the one hand, the Central Bank and other financial institutions must keep bank deposits secret, but on the other, law enforcement bodies must have an opportunity to intervene in criminal activities at an early stage and prevent them.

However, under the law that ensures the secrecy of bank deposits, that is, banking financial secrecy, law enforcement bodies have the right to receive the required information from banks only if a criminal case is opened or by decision of a court. Yet, there is a solution. What is it? The Central Bank can contact law enforcement bodies at its own initiative if it detects some dubious transactions. But if the Central Bank has this right, operations units of the Interior Ministry, other law enforcement bodies or special services can contact the Central Bank. The Central Bank can check dubious transactions and provide information. It is relatively easy to develop this process with modern communications, and it is possible to do this quickly. I believe we should go down this road to start with. Naturally, it is essential to upgrade this practice and improve the regulatory framework.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Mr President, a question about a different drama, actually, a big one.

Vladimir Putin: Please.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: It is related to the British warship near Crimea. Do you think the world was on the brink of a Third World War, of all things?

Vladimir Putin: No, I do not think so. Is this a question or did you…?

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: We have received questions on this matter.

Vladimir Putin: No, I do not think so. I will explain what I think and what I do not.

First, this was apparently a provocation; it was obvious that it was a provocation. What did they mean to show and what goals did they want to achieve?

To begin with, this was a comprehensive provocation, and it was conducted not only by the British but also by the Americans. The British entered our territorial waters in the afternoon, whereas earlier, at 7:30 am, a US strategic reconnaissance plane took off from a NATO military airfield in Greece, I think from Crete. I was briefed on this, of course, I know all about it. If I remember correctly, tail number 63/9792. We saw it very clearly and monitored it. It was clear that the destroyer entered [our territorial waters] in pursuit of military objectives, trying to uncover the actions of our Armed Forces to stop a provocation, with the help of the reconnaissance aircraft they were trying to identify how we operated, and where things were was located and how they operated. We saw this and sent them the information which we deemed necessary. I may have let this slip; I hope the military will forgive me. This is the first thing.

The second thing is the political component. Recently, a few days ago, a meeting was held in Geneva. The question was: why was there such a provocation? What was all of that for? For the sake of emphasising that these people do not respect the Crimeans’ choice to join the Russian Federation? Is there something they do not understand there? Fine, keep not accepting it. But why a provocation of this kind?

Nailya Asker-zade: Maybe NATO is teasing us? The Sea Breeze exercise is underway now, and yesterday there was a Dutch frigate.

Vladimir Putin: Here is what I would like to say. You said that this put the world on the brink of a global war. No, of course, not. Even if we had sunk that ship, it is nevertheless difficult to imagine that this would have put the world on the brink of a third world war because those who did this know they could not win a war like that. This is very important.

I do not think that we would have been happy at the turn of events you mentioned, but we at least know what we are fighting for: we are fighting for ourselves and our future on our own territory. It was not us who covered thousands of kilometres by air and sea towards them; it was them who approached our borders and entered our territorial sea, which is a crucial component in the overall situation.

I am not concerned about this or that somebody does not respect the choice of the people in Crimea to join Russia. I have a different concern. Look now, they raised a clamour over the fact that we were conducting exercises on our own territory near the Ukrainian border. I instructed the Defence Ministry to quietly end the drills and withdraw the troops, if this is such a great concern for them. We did so. But instead of responding positively and saying “Ok, we understand your reaction to our indignation,” what did they do? They approached our borders.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Mr President, you said during your annual Address to the Federal Assembly that picking on Russia for any reason has become some kind of new sport. Does this mean they tried to pick on us again this time?

Vladimir Putin: No, this is not picking on us. As I said, this is not what is worrying me. I am worried about another, more fundamental thing, namely, the beginning of military development in Ukrainian territory. Under the Ukrainian Constitution, no foreign bases can be established in the country. Training centres and other facilities and formats are possible. But the military development of a territory that directly borders on our country creates a considerable security problem for us. This has to do with the vital interests of the Russian Federation and the Russian people. Of course, this is alarming, and we must think about it.

Nailya Asker-zade: I suggest that we move on to the next group of questions about social policy, which is largely tied to the economy, but is somewhat separate, and see what kind of questions we received from families with children. I see we have a video message from Astrakhan, and we also have a text message. Shall we watch the video?

Vladimir Putin: I am fine with that, please.

Nailya Asker-zade: Good afternoon, Ms Pluzhnikova. You are on live, please go ahead.

Oksana Pluzhnikova: Good afternoon, Mr President. I am speaking on behalf of all mothers in Astrakhan Region. We want to ask you about the new rules concerning payments for children aged 3 to 7.

Under the new rules, the calculations are based on income earned over the 12 months of 2020, but everyone knows that it was a difficult year for all of us: many have lost their jobs and livelihoods. Our region is no exception, and to this day, employment has remained a problem in our region, but I think, this is the case all over the country.

Here is my question: the authorities in our region require income information for 12 out of 12 months in 2020, although the Government resolution does not talk about providing information on each of the 12 months in 2020. In other regions, showing one month of official income is enough to receive a child allowance. Why is it that only our region interprets this resolution in its own way and denies payments to single mothers, large families, considers a flat and a house one single piece of property, and does not deduct alimony from the income that is paid to another family? The Astrakhan Region’s ministry cites specifically the Government resolution, not the regional one when these questions are asked.

We asked some ministers from other regions for help, and wrote to Olga Batalina herself [Deputy Minister of Labour and Social Protection]. The answer was that the minimum requirement is a pay stub for one month. Ms Batalina told us this, as did other ministers, including Natalya Oskina [Minister of Social Protection of Altai Territory]. But our ministry holds its ground and wants us to show proof of income for 12 months.

Please help get things in order in our ministry. Why are they disregarding this resolution?

Nailya Asker-zade: We are talking about the zero income rule, which says that if people are not officially employed, they are not eligible for child allowances.

Vladimir Putin: Correct.

Ms Pluzhnikova, can you rephrase that? Why exactly are you being denied these allowances?

Oksana Pluzhnikova: Because we are unable to show proof of income for 12 months. One month or five months are not good enough for them, they want 12 months.

Vladimir Putin: Under the resolution, it is based on yearly income. Your annual income…

Olga Pluzhnikova: Correct, annual income. But in other regions, one month is enough.

Vladimir Putin: Ms Pluzhnikova, look, if you have exceeded this amount of income in any given month, it does not mean that you should be denied payment. It would be illegal then.

We will need to take a closer look. Do our colleagues have your details?

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Yes, of course.

Vladimir Putin: I will issue appropriate instructions.

Oksana Pluzhnikova: Mr President, may I take one more second of your time?

Vladimir Putin: Of course, go ahead please.

Oksana Pluzhnikova: This concerns the same issue, because those whose child benefits were approved last year and then expired have lost them due to lack of income. Even if they spend one month without an income, they lose these benefits.

Vladimir Putin: What do you mean “lack of income”? I do not understand.

Oksana Pluzhnikova: They have simply lost it.

Nailya Asker-zade: This is zero income. If a person does not receive an official income, he is not entitled to get any payments because some people might rely only on these payments and are not motivated to get a job.

Vladimir Putin: You are saying that if a person does not work, he is denied the payments. Is that right? Do I understand you correctly?

Oksana Pluzhnikova: No. If a person works for 11 months but misses one month, these are grounds to deny him the payments.

Vladimir Putin: That is clear. So, he works for 11 months and does not work for just one month, and he is denied the payment benefit, right?

Well, let us figure it out. I will certainly instruct the Government to analyse this situation and provide a response. That said, if a person lost his job, the simplest thing for him is to be registered at an employment service. This is the easiest thing to do. Once he does this, nobody has the right to deny him the payment of relevant benefits. He should do that immediately…

Oksana Pluzhnikova: But they are not taking into account registering at the labour exchange. So, we do not know what to do about this. We are in complete chaos.

Vladimir Putin: Ms Pluzhnikova, I am telling you that if a person has registered at the labour exchange, nobody has the right to deny him payments. This is illegal. However, we will try to analyse your case separately. I will certainly instruct the Government to do this.

But let me repeat for the third time, that if a person loses his job but registers at an employment office, he cannot be denied relevant payments. I hope my colleagues in your region, Astrakhan, will hear this and respond. But even if they do, I will still instruct the Government to deal with this specific case. Is that all right?

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Let us hope that justice will prevail.

Oksana Pluzhnikova: Ok, thank you.

Vladimir Putin: Thank you for bringing this issue up because, as you said, it concerns many people. I hope we will make corresponding adjustments here to ensure people’s rights.

Nailya Asker-zade: We have had similar inquiries from the Astrakhan Region.

Vladimir Putin: Wonderful. All right. We will figure this out.

Thank you, Ms Pluzhnikova.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Mr President, as a follow-up on social support: families with children are indeed getting extensive support during the complicated year of the pandemic. Applications for some payments can be submitted as early as tomorrow. For example, pregnant women in difficult circumstances and single parents. And a great help for parents whose children will go to school – 10,000 rubles. These payments will also begin in August.

Clearly, the plans are ambitious. Will the system withstand this extra load?

Vladimir Putin: It will.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Will it be possible to pay everything out on schedule?

Vladimir Putin: It will. In the first year, 46 billion rubles are earmarked for the first two categories – pregnant women who applied early on in their pregnancy, and the second category. These funds have been reserved, slightly over 46 billion. There will be a little more next year. We do not see any problems here. I had another talk with the Finance Minister yesterday – all the money has been set aside. The issue with children starting school had not been resolved because according to the law, children can go to school at the age of six, not seven. However, in some families, children will start school at the age of six, whereas in others they will not. Naturally, the Government raised the issue: what if people get the money but their child will not start school at six?

However, I believe, and I am sure that the Government will hear me, that everyone should be paid including those families with six-year-olds, even if they do not start school this year. But I am just reminding parents that it is a lump-sum payment, therefore the money they get this year should be spent on preparing the child for school and buying some things in advance even if the child does not start school this year.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: I suggest continuing our live marathon and going to the Message Processing Centre.

Natalya Yuryeva has the floor.

Natalya Yuryeva: Thank you.

We have a message that we just cannot ignore. It is rather a cry from the heart. Our hearts really sank as we read it. I ask the editors to display the message from Svetlana Chemezova of Yaroslavl.

She writes as follows: “Hello, Mr President,

I live with my 9-year-old son, work as a cleaner and my wage is low – 12,700 rubles. Payments are deducted from my wage at work to repay the loan, after which I am left with 1,500 rubles. I have no money to pay my utility bills and rent or buy schoolbooks for my son – I have no money to spend. My strong wish is that you help poor people and resolve the issue of loans, which a hopeless situation can force them to take.”

Vladimir Putin: I understand that the situation is not easy. I have a concrete answer and I will get straight to it.

Generally, as you see, we are carrying out a whole package of measures to support people who have found themselves in an uneasy situation, to say nothing of those with children, and to support families with children. I will not list them all now but this package includes a broad range of measures.

But this is not about this set of measures only; what matters is that we want the government to always lend a shoulder in any form to [families with] children from their birth almost all the way until they graduate from school, should they end up stranded. We have just talked about one measure from this package. There are also measures to support women visiting a clinic in their early pregnancy, who happen to be in a difficult situation, and other measures – all until her child starts going to school, and also to single-parent families. Hopefully, you will also be able to take advantage of some of these tools.

As for the loans, there is a specific decision that was finalised yesterday: on the initiative of the United Russia party, some deputies, a law was passed, and I signed it yesterday, under which no payments, including those to repay loans, can be deducted from a person’s income if that leaves him with an amount below the minimum subsistence level. I believe this measure will protect people in your situation, which they can take advantage of. I strongly believe this is not all that can work to support you. I repeat again that we have a diversified package of measures to support families with children.

It is a very important thing I have just said. That is, from this moment, the banks have no right to withdraw money from a person’s account to repay loans they have issued to this person, if he or she is left with an amount below the minimum subsistence level.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Incidentally, we have also received messages like this regarding microloans.

Vladimir Putin: Right.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: I suggest that we pick the Miscellaneous and Personal section, which is, perhaps, the most unpredictable and, potentially, the most exciting section.

We have an audio call.

Vladimir Putin: Please, go ahead.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Let us pick. Here it is, Starodub, Bryansk Region.

Alexander Ismailov: Good afternoon, Mr President.

Vladimir Putin: Good afternoon.

Alexander Ismailov: I am Alexander Ismailov from the town of Starodub, Bryansk Region. Here is my question: what dreams of yours will no longer come true?

Thank you.

Vladimir Putin: Mr Ismailov, I think every person, everyone literally – you and I, and these lovely young ladies sitting next to me, and everyone who is listening to us now – we all should think about the best to come, hope for the best, and this cannot but be part of a dream. I hope you have one too, and I have one as well. There must not be a place in life where a person has nothing to dream about or hope for. I think we need to think positively.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: That is, we can dream no matter what the dream is?

Vladimir Putin: Correct.

Nailya Asker-zade: Most importantly, one should not forget how to dream.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Right.

Vladimir Putin: You know, there is a popular belief that if…

Nailya Asker-zade: …if you really want something, it will come true.

Vladimir Putin: It will definitely come true; this is one thing. And you need to think positively, then good things will happen.

Nailya Asker-zade: Let us hope that everything will be fine and COVID will eventually go away, because we are very tired of it.

Vladimir Putin: No, it will not go away by itself. We need to get vaccinated.

Nailya Asker-zade: We will definitely heed your advice.

Vladimir Putin: And you need to get revaccinated.

Nailya Asker-zade: Definitely. As we have already understood, it must be Sputnik and nothing else.

Vladimir Putin: Not necessarily.

Nailya Asker-zade: Well, if the President chose Sputnik, how can we choose anything different?

Vladimir Putin: No, no, this is not at all necessary.

Nailya Asker-zade: You are in good health.

Vladimir Putin: So what? You know, there is also, I repeat, EpiVacCorona that was developed by Vektor, which does not even cause a spike in temperature.

Nailya Asker-zade: Absolutely safe.

Vladimir Putin: All we do is absolutely safe.

Nailya Asker-zade: No reaction, correct.

Vladimir Putin: No reaction whatsoever. A person does not even feel they were vaccinated. This is important for some people, you know.

Nailya Asker-zade: We still have a section “Infrastructure and Housing and Utilities.”

There are many problematic inquiries, especially on gas infrastructure development. This has always been an urgent issue for the regions. Even after you announced the initiative on reducing the cost of utility connections, the number of questions has not decreased. Maybe, it has even increased.

Vladimir Putin: Sorry, not about reducing costs.

Nailya Asker-zade: Free pipeline miles.

Vladimir Putin: Yes, free miles.

Nailya Asker-zade: Let us see what inquiries we have on this issue.

For example, we have Crimea, Karachayevo-Circassia and other regions. My computer is not obeying me. Who will win – technology or me. I do not know. We can choose.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: We have many messages in different formats. Gas connection is here…

Vladimir Putin: Just press the “gas connection” button and that is it.

Nailya Asker-zade: Let us see this one.

Svetlana Kultygina: Mr President,

Last year we asked you about gas connections, but we have not received a written answer. The regional Energy Ministry promised to reply but never did. Wood is very expensive and gas cylinders were banned. Can you tell us how to live, what to do? I am 70 and my husband is 74. Meanwhile, there are mayors’ summer houses near us and they have all the gas they need. What can we do?

Vladimir Putin: I understand this is the Sverdlovsk Region. If the mayor has gas at his summer house, the pipe main must be somewhere near, right? So, under the adopted decision, a gas pipe must be laid to your plot of land. This service must be free.

As for what to do next, this is a separate issue, how to arrange gas supply inside your land plot. Let us look closer at this later. You have their information, right?

Nailya Asker-zade: Yes, of course, we have all the information.

I suggest moving to Karachayevo-Circassia.

Vladimir Putin: Just a second. Please, leave this information for me so I have it.

Nailya Asker-zade: Of course, we have all the information. This was the Sverdlovsk Region.

Vladimir Putin: Yes, we will do this in a way that ensures that these promises are honoured. Notably, the pipeline must be connected to their land plot free of charge. As for the facilities inside the land plot, we will deal with that separately.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: So, Karachayevo-Circassia?

Vladimir Putin: Yes, please.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: You are welcome, you are online, please, go ahead.

Roza Kappusheva: Hello!

Vladimir Putin: Hello, Roza.

Roza Kappusheva: I am addressing you with a request on behalf of the residents of the northern part of Ust-Jeguty town in the Karachayevo-Circassian Republic. I am asking for help with gas supply. The pipeline here is mere 200 metres away from us, but according to our estimates, each family has to pay about 200,000 rubles to get gas. Most families living here are young families with many children, and this is a lot of money for an ordinary family. I ask you to help us, to assist. Unfortunately, the local authorities respond to our requests by saying there is no money. We do not live in a mountainous village. The pipeline is very close. Can you please check on this?

Vladimir Putin: Is this a direct link?

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Yes.

Vladimir Putin: Ms Kappusheva, please, tell me. Do they want you to pay 200,000 for laying the gas pipe to your land lot?

Roza Kappusheva: No, this is the total of our expenses.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: It is probably the outstanding amount.

Vladimir Putin: We still need to figure out what sort of expenses they are. To lay the pipe or proceed with the work on your property, or what?

Nailya Asker-zade: It is probably a project and a tie-in.

Vladimir Putin: Wait, wait, we will get to the point.

Roza Kappusheva: The first thing is the permit, they demand money for that, too. Second – laying the pipe proper at the required distance.

Vladimir Putin: To lay the pipe to your property, right?

Roza Kappusheva: Right. And not just to my property; other people live further on. This district has gas distribution connections at some properties; however, many people do not have a gas line.

Vladimir Putin: Got it.

Ms Kappusheva, we will be figuring this out. I will talk to the head of the republic about this, but I want you and others to know that the pipe must be laid free of charge from the main pipeline to your property and that of the others.

Roza Kappusheva: But not everywhere.

Vladimir Putin: It must be done either at the expense of Gazprom or the companies in charge of gas distribution in your republic. It means it is free up to the property line, to the fence, as they say, whereas the owner pays for the line inside the property.

However, there are some ideas in this respect, too. I recently talked to some Government members about this. They should draft a single contract for all the work on the properties to be done according to a single plan with centralised purchasing which means lower prices. It means that everything concerning laying the pipe up to the fence, to your property, must be done for free, not for 200, 300 or even 100,000 rubles. In some places it might even cost a million. But this should never be your concern.

I assure you that I will definitely speak with the head of the republic about this.

Nailya Asker-zade: Thank you very much.

Vladimir Putin: Wait a second. Are you satisfied with the answer, Ms Kappusheva?

Roza Kappusheva: Yes. But we have a completely new district.

Vladimir Putin: So what?

Roza Kappusheva: And so there is a lot to do.

Vladimir Putin: This is clear. But that is another question.

Roza Kappusheva: As for gas, yes, of course. If it turns out this way, we will be grateful to you.

Vladimir Putin: Alright. Done.

Roza Kappusheva: It will be a miracle.

Vladimir Putin: I will make sure. Agreed then. Thank you.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: These are everyday issues.

Vladimir Putin: It is ok. Why not? These are people’s concerns.

Nailya Asker-zade: I would like to explain the situation, if I may.

After the law on the ”free mile“ came into force, the cost of the tie-in and the project increased two to three-fold in some regions. We have received similar messages, for example, from Crimea.

Vladimir Putin: This is not just a question of whether the law on this free mile is enforced, although it may not be a mile, it could be five metres or a kilometre or more. The question is that due to the rise in prices for some types of products, including those for metals, prices are simply rising – first. Second, people have to go to different companies, which really start to drive up the cost of these works. That is why I said that now the Government is considering the possibility of doing this under one contract, one agreement, and minimising costs.

Nailya Asker-zade: Why should the project cost increase – due to rising paper prices?

Vladimir Putin: Yes, this is an issue that should be given special attention. I completely agree with those who are talking about this. And I repeat, this is why the Government is now working on a standard-form contract so that there is no unjustified overpricing.

Nailya Asker-zade: The law on a free mile for gas pipelines did not apply to gardeners’ non-commercial partnerships, and there are a lot of those in the Moscow Region, we have received many requests. Here are some examples. Reutov: ”The last mile pipe, about 150 metres, costs 90,000 rubles.“ Next, Volgograd: “There is a private gas pipeline 15 metres away from my house, but the owner is demanding 300,000 rubles for gas connection. Help me deal with this.”

Vladimir Putin: As for gardeners’ non-commercial partnerships (SNT), indeed, what we have been talking about so far are only localities where people live permanently, and there are thousands of them in the Russian Federation. So, a decision was taken to make the last mile free for localities where people live permanently, at least at the first stage.

Nailya Asker-zade: In the Moscow Region, many people live [permanently] in such SNTs.

Vladimir Putin: Right, many people live like this, but today, at this stage, we are talking about people who officially live permanently, for a long time, in towns.

There are different gardeners’ partnerships, there are those that stand apart, and the problem is that their land is, let’s say, collective property. This gives rise to legal issues.

There are partnerships that are located within the boundaries of a town, which means that, roughly, a pipeline to the fence of this gardeners’ partnership inside a town should be laid free of charge, and everything behind the fence is seen as a single household because the land is collective property.

The many thousands of towns are included in the first stage of the joint project to make the last mile free. Gas must also be supplied to SNTs by 2024–2025. This is part of the national gas infrastructure development programme, which covers 77 constituent entities of the Russian Federation. Why not all constituent entities? Because some of them do not have centralised gas supply. The Gas Supply Programme of the Russian Federation will be carried out in the 77 regions that have centralised gas supply.

Let us wait and see how we follow through on this stage. You see, even here there are many questions regarding the last mile to individual households. Things need to be put straight. At least, we should implement it as a pilot project. Again, there are tens of thousands of households like the above. We will see what comes of it: if it works, and works as it should, we will, probably, take additional steps to address other issues as well.

Nailya Asker-zade: We are looking forward to it.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Mr President, people of all ages from all over the country are writing to us. Understandably, young people have many internet-related questions. We have such subtopics as Communications and the Internet and Internet Regulation. Let’s give our next question to Moscow. This is a direct video call. Let's take it.

Vladimir Putin: Please go ahead.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: You are on the air.

Nikita Levinsky: Hello, Mr President.

Vladimir Putin: Hello, Nikita.

Nikita Levinsky: I am a blogger. My name is Nikita Levinsky. I have over 1 million followers on Instagram. My colleagues asked you this question in 2018 and later checked up on it, but the issue is so pressing for my colleagues and me that I would be remiss not to ask the question again. If there is an opportunity, I will take advantage of it. Should we expect foreign social media, websites or media hosting websites such as TikTok, Telegram, Twitter, YouTube and others to be blocked?

Vladimir Putin: No. We do not have any such plans. We are not going to block anyone. We are going to work with them. But the problem is that they tell us where to go and how to get there each time they fail to comply with our rules and laws. Nikita, you are a Russian citizen, are you not? You and I should have a sense of dignity, your colleagues, too.

Nikita Levinsky: I know what you are talking about.

Vladimir Putin: When they tell us, “You know, we will be working in your country, and if you do not like something, we will give you beads and you should be happy with those shiny objects.” This humiliates our dignity. If they work in our country and earn good money, they must abide by our laws. We are not asking them to do anything special.

So, as step one, and I hope step one will be enough, we insist and we want these international platforms to open their full-fledged representative offices in our country – legal entities with which we can at least maintain a dialogue.

We also tell them: “You are distributing child pornography or suicide instructions, or how to make Molotov cocktails, and so on – you must remove that content.” And they simply do not listen to us, they do not even want to hear what we are saying. This is wrong.

No self-respecting country around the world behaves this way. Everyone in Europe and even more so in Asia insists on a civilised approach to this kind of work, especially so since sometimes they are not behaving in a civilised manner in their own countries, either.

So, we understand that we are being heard and some of our colleagues are going to comply and open offices in Russia. If they do not comply, or if their offices do not abide by our rules and Russian law, then there are various technical methods, including slowing the speed and so forth. To reiterate, we have no plans to shut down anything.

What I would like is to see our respective companies also develop in this direction and provide creative and talented people like you and your fellow bloggers with an opportunity to express themselves on Russian social media and on similar platforms, to provide services to our citizens in a variety of areas and make our lives better.

Nikita Levinsky: Thank you.

Nailya Asker-zade: Many social media users have breathed a sigh of relief, probably including Nikita. Of course, it is better to look for mutually acceptable solutions and talk, rather than ban, as was the case with Telegram.

Let's go to the Message Processing Centre.

Vladimir Putin: I think we reached an agreement with Telegram. It is operational, and everything is fine.

Nailya Asker-zade: Ok then.

Message Processing Centre. Tatyana Remezova, go ahead.

Tatyana Remezova: Thank you very much, Nailya. I suggest moving from TikTok and Instagram to a more pressing issue – housing and utilities.

Mr President, we would like to show you billing statements we received from residents of Demyanka village in the Tyumen Region. Demyanka or the village of Demyanskoye. So a flat with an area of 70 square metres received a bill for 74,780 rubles. The flat next door – 60 square metres received a bill for 50,661 rubles for April. We have these payment demand orders. We are not inventing anything; these are the facts. We will try to connect with Demyanka residents, which sent us these documents. They should respond to our direct video call. Let us see: Housing and Utilities, Demyanka.

Good afternoon, you are on the air, the President hears you. Please go ahead.

Tarlan Tagirov: Hello, Mr President,

Vladimir Putin: Good afternoon!

Tarlan Tagirov: I am Tarlan Tagirov and standing behind me are residents of Demyanka village, in particular, those who live in the building on 4 Pionerskaya Street and 15 Zheleznodorozhnaya Street. We were all moved to a new building under the programme to relocate people from dilapidated housing. We were beyond ourselves with joy, but our joy was spoiled by the following facts.

The first fact – we were relocated from dilapidated housing to new buildings for an additional payment of up to 330,000 rubles. This was contrary to the law and the Housing Code. However, we bought our flats. We were relocated last February and received our utility bills. They varied from 40,000 to 70,000 rubles. We approached many authorities and they gave us the same response: the rates are economically justified. We cannot get anywhere. We went to the prosecutor’s office, the governor’s executive office, district administration and the housing inspection on pricing policy, but we are not getting anywhere.

Meanwhile, 70 percent of residents in our building are pensioners. They receive pensions from 10,000 to 20,000 rubles. The utility bills run from 20,000 rubles and up. This is simply unrealistic. People have been put on the brink of survival. Such fees do not exist anywhere. We have to pay 333 rubles for a cubic metre of cold water. This fee is multiplied by 1.5 times, so there is a surcharge on this payment. When we lived in our old building, we paid 1,482 per gigacalorie for heating, whereas now the rate is 5,331 rubles, plus there is a surcharge of 50 percent.

Vladimir Putin: Mr Tagirov, I understand. There is one thing that I probably did not hear well enough. In the beginning, you said that you had to pay a fair amount of money during relocation. What for? I did not understand.

Tarlan Tagirov: I will be more precise, if I may.

Last September we were invited to the administration to submit applications for consent to be relocated from dilapidated housing. The application is written in no particular format expressing a residents’ consent to relocation. However, we were surprised to see that applications had already been written on our behalf with the following wording: “I ask you to withdraw my old apartment and provide a new one in return, taking into account the buy-out price,” which in itself implies an additional payment for relocation. Naturally, the residents refused to sign this application. Then, a week later we were summoned again by the head of the village administration. She persuaded the residents that there would be no cheating since there was heavy criminal prosecution and the administration would not dare it. The people believed her words and signed the applications. And this year, right before the relocation, we were billed up to 330,000 rubles in extra charges. The apartments had been evaluated according to market value without a reduction ratio.

Vladimir Putin: Mr Tagirov, I see a powerful support team behind you, like the one Yasha the Artilleryman had in The Wedding in Malinovka film. So the victory will be ours, do not doubt it.

First of all, I do not understand what sort of extra charges those are. It is nonsense, I don’t understand this, but I promise that we will sort it out. That is first. Second, the numbers you gave … Are you with us?

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: I think, he hears us on TV now.

Vladimir Putin: I hope you hear me. First, it is unclear what sort of extra charges they are. Second, the figures you gave me are mind-boggling, to put it mildly, both for water supply and the common meter. Water, if memory serves, costs on average 37 rubles per cubic metre, and two rubles per gigacalorie, although it might be more expensive in the Tyumen Region. This is on average, but again, it can cost more in Tyumen. But it is totally incomprehensible where the numbers you mentioned come from and the final payment result. One can imagine that the residential building was not completely settled, and then those tenants who moved in were obliged to pay for maintenance of the entire building. But I understand that you have all the flats settled. I promise you that we will definitely deal with this, at any rate we will find out what is going on.

You know, I really do understand from visiting the dilapidated buildings people live in, and of course, it is a great happiness when people move from these slums to normal housing. But this should not be accompanied by levies, but rather by support for the further operation of this building, and I think that it will be so in this case. We have the information, right?

Nailya Asker-zade: Yes, we do. This is the Tyumen Region, village of Demyanka, We can contact him, Mr Tarlan Tagirov.

Vladimir Putin: Mr Tagirov, we will certainly sort this out.

Nailya Asker-zade: I suggest looking at what other problems there are in our housing and utilities sector.

Vladimir Putin: Let’s do this.

Nailya Asker-zade: Let’s watch a video address from Pskov.

(Playing a video address.)

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: This is a case when a video speaks louder than words.

Vladimir Putin: Yes. Is the author of this address on the line?

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: No.

Nailya Asker-zade: We can call him.

Vladimir Putin: Yes, please do.

Nailya Asker-zade: We will do this later.

Colleagues, please try to get in touch with Pskov.

In the meantime, I will ask the next question.

Vladimir Putin: Go ahead.

Nailya Asker-zade: Why only the Far East has a curator among deputy prime ministers?

Vladimir Putin: Will we get back to the previous subject?

Nailya Asker-zade: Yes, we certainly will. I promise.

Vladimir Putin: Ok.

As for the curators of some regions from among the Government leadership, we do indeed use this method for the Far East and the Arctic, and for the Sothern Federal District. We recently discussed this matter with the Government leadership. Overall, this practice is paying off.

We have agreed that the Prime Minister will submit proposals for the senior officials, deputy prime ministers, to oversee developments in some regions. I regard this as justified, especially because this method ensures closer contact with the regions concerned and a deeper and more sustainable insight into their problems. I hope that as a result of this practice the decisions made in the [federal] centre will be implemented more meaningfully and accurately and will have a greater effect for the territories.

Nailya Asker-zade: Does this mean that all current deputy prime ministers will also be made responsible for some other regions?

Vladimir Putin: Not “some other regions” but specially assigned regions.

Nailya Asker-zade: In addition to the Far East, will each region have a curator?

Vladimir Putin: Yes, this is what we have agreed to do. We will see how this system functions on a larger scale other than only in the Far East, the Arctic or the North Caucasus.

Nailya Asker-zade: We are still trying to get in touch with Pskov.

We are now moving on to the Message Processing Centre.

Vladimir Putin: Please, keep trying.

Nailya Asker-zade: I will keep my word.

Tatyana Remezova.

Tatyana Remezova: Thank you.

I would like to say a few words about the good work our volunteers have already done during this Direct Line programme. For example, they have expedited the delivery of medications and food, helped a disabled person in the Saratov Region to get an electric wheelchair, cleared away landfills in the Rostov Region, and cut down a tree that was threatening people in a residential house in the Tver Region. But we have encountered a problem. When somebody calls Direct Line and local officials learn about this, that person starts getting calls with hints and even threats. One of such cases was reported by our volunteer, Regina Kireyeva.

Regina, tell us about it, please.

Regina Kireyeva: In her message, Yelena Kalinina, a resident of Novokuznetsk, requested assistance in repairing the roof of kindergarten-school No. 235 where her grandson Ratmir studied. The renovation was badly needed because children faced completely insanitary conditions.

Tatyana Remezova: By the way, we have a photo of this school and the roof, sent by Ms Kalinina. Will you please show the photos?

Regina Kireyeva: I then called the Department of Education and asked them to comment on the situation.However they could not believe that a Direct Line volunteer was calling them and declined to provide me with any information. Ms Kalinina called the Direct Line the next day and requested that her message be deleted because representatives of the Department of Education had phoned her and asked her to delete it. “Do you not feel sorry for the kindergarten director and your grandson?” they said, whatever that may mean.

Tatyana Remezova: This is very interesting wording:“Do you not feel sorry for your grandson?” What does her grandson have to do with all this? I believe that we should now try to contact Ms Kalinina and find out how she is now.

Vladimir Putin: Go ahead.

Tatyana Remezova: We will try and do it.

Vladimir Putin: Yes, let’s do it.

Tatyana Remezova: We go to the Regional Government section. Great, we have Ms Kalinina on the line.

Ms Kalinina, you are on air, and the President can hear you. Are you not afraid of speaking on Direct Line after all that has happened?

Yelena Kalinina: Good afternoon.

I am having trouble hearing you, I can hardly hear what you are saying.

Nailya Asker-zade: Let’s try to call her back later and go on to the next question now.

Vladimir Putin: Phone her right now.

Nailya Asker-zade: Let’s call Ms Kalinina back.

Vladimir Putin: Of course, she is standing there. Give her the phone.

Nailya Asker-zade: Ms Kalinina, we will try to call you back. It appears that there are some magnetic storms and communications problems.

Vladimir Putin: Of course, not.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: We are focusing on the equipment but sometimes even the equipment fails.

Nailya Asker-zade: Right now, we suggest calling Pskov. Here is the call that we promised you. Yes, we are ready to air this call about water problems.

Vladimir Putin: Ms Kalinina, we will be right back.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Right now we have Pskov.

Vladimir Putin: Yes, give us Pskov.

Nailya Asker-zade: Good afternoon, Andrei. We saw your video. You have approached the matter creatively, indeed. Please tell us about your problems.

Andrei Tarasov: Hello, studio. Good afternoon, Mr President.

Vladimir Putin: Hello.

Andrei Tarasov: Indeed, the problem is very unusual.

The fact is that under the Clean Water programme, which Pskov has been carrying out since 2003, and according to applicable regulations, our city, since it has over 200,000 people, is supposed to have additional water supply sources. Pskov has a second alternative for water from an underground water source with wells as deep as 70 metres or so. However, when the project was being implemented, no one thought about what would happen to this water when it is heated up.

This water from the underground source has good bacteriological indices, that is, there is no bacteria in it. It is fairly clean and meets sanitary standards, but it precipitates when heated. Heavy sediment has killed all new buildings in the area of ​​this water intake. We have a building that is three years old, and the hot water supply in it has stopped. The same has happened to other buildings. For example, there is a block of flats in Okolnaya Street with polypropylene pipes which preclude rust. However, there is rust-like sediment. We clean it…

Most importantly, we began to discuss this problem with the municipal authorities, and everyone is saying: everything is up to code, everything is fine. Pskov Region Governor Mikhail Vedernikov stepped up and promised to help …

They are unable to find the money to build a water treatment plant because the water meets sanitary standards. As far as I know, they have contacted various authorities, but no one has allocated the money for this. We are now trying to find the money to install this water treatment plant as part of upgrading the water supply system. We appreciate your help with this.

Vladimir Putin: I see.

Nailya Asker-zade: The quality of the call leaves much to be desired, but you understood the main question.

Vladimir Putin: I did. The problem is clear, Mr Tarasov. I understand that this is not an old system, it is new and modern. But unfortunately, the water quality gives rise to the processes that you mentioned.

Of course, this certainly requires additional financial resources. Look, a fairly large amount of money has been set aside for similar projects. We have set aside about 500 billion rubles for infrastructure projects, with 150 billion coming directly from the National Welfare Fund for housing and utilities, and another 150 billion coming through infrastructure securities and DOM.RF. These sources can be used to address these problems.

I understand that the money has been spent and it is difficult to return to this, but what can we do, things happen. People cannot live in such conditions. Therefore, I will instruct the Government, the Ministry of Construction and Housing and Utilities, Deputy Prime Minister Marat Khusnullin and, of course, we will get in touch with the Governor. They will sit down and find a source of funding to resolve your issue, no doubt about it.

Andrei Tarasov: Mr President, a quick follow-up question, if I may.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Unfortunately, the connection is very poor.

Yelena Kalinina is standing by for your call again.

Nailya Asker-zade: From Novokuznetsk.

Ms Kalinina, can you hear us?

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: While they are re-establishing the connection, Mr President, I would like to continue with the muddy water theme. We went through the entire mass of information. In fact, there are very many messages. There was Pskov, for example. The Penza Region: “A filthy liquid is coming from the taps instead of water. You can’t wash your face with it, let alone drink it.” What is more, people sent not just messages but also photographs like these. (Shows a photograph.) The Leningrad Region: “The water is either muddy or there is no water at all. I receive a tiny pension, but we have to buy water at the shop,” says Galina Smirnova.

Vladimir Putin: Look, I have already spoken about this, but I would like to reiterate: It is with all the problems of this kind in mind that a decision has been taken to allocate additional funds.

Everyone is aware of what is really happening in this sphere, but I will repeat: the local, municipal and regional authorities are seeking to avoid making decisions related to tariff hikes, because purchasing power has declined, particularly during the pandemic period, when the real incomes of many people dropped. Raising the tariffs, increasing the payments is a very hard decision, of course, and clearly it is difficult for people to endure all this. This is all clear. That is why the local authorities are restraining the growth of tariffs. Hence the underfunding of the sector itself, the delays in maintenance, failure to replace water pipes… It is very difficult to organise the investment process because it becomes unattractive. It is as simple as that.

It is for this reason that the decisions I have mentioned were made. We have allocated 150 billion rubles from the National Welfare Fund directly for housing and public utilities and another 150 billion – via DOM.RF, in total 500 billion for infrastructure. These are the sources that can and will be used to address problems of this sort. The only thing that the regions need to do is to prepare relevant proposals in good time, address the Government and defend their proposals, the documents should be properly drawn up.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Colleagues, let us go back to the Message Processing Centre. Natalya Yuryeva, please. I know you have an interesting story.

Natalya Yuryeva: In fact, we have very many enquiries regarding the emergency state of school buildings, complaints are coming from practically all over the country. I suggest we travel to the Far East and receive a video call from Ussuriysk, the village of Vozdvizhenka.

Hello, you are on air. Please introduce yourself and put your question to the President.

Natalya Tolmacheva: Hello, Mr President. We are chilled here and very nervous. Forgive me, please, I will read what I have to say because I am nervous.

Vladimir Putin: Please, Ms Tolmacheva.

Natalya Tolmacheva: At the end of the last academic year… Do you hear me?

Vladimir Putin: Yes, we can hear you well.

Natalya Tolmacheva: A wall collapsed in the old building of our school. The building is about half a century old. Of course, we have another building, but it is too small. It is crowded there, and we will have to study in two shifts.

Please help us build a new modern school.

The army left our town in 2009, and everything has gone down the drain. We have raw water and dilapidated housing – it is impossible to live there. Roads are another story, just like all over the country. We have no water treatment facilities, and our sewers spill out right outside the town.

In general, we are bogged down with problems, and we would like to ask for your assistance in drawing serious attention to us.

Vladimir Putin: All right. Ms Tolmacheva, as I see it, you really have many problems. We will certainly talk to the regional leaders about what needs to be done after the withdrawal of Defence Ministry units and what can be done in the near future. I understand you are worried about the condition of the school, right?

Natalya Tolmacheva: Yes, that is the main problem.

Vladimir Putin: Yes, I see. This is why you are standing together with the kids there. Is that the school behind you?

Natalya Tolmacheva: Yes, that is the old building of our school.

Vladimir Putin: If a wall fell down, the school is obviously dilapidated.

Look, we have about 40,000 schools in the Russian Federation, and some of them are in bad condition. It will not be enough to bring them up to standards. We must build new schools, about 1,300 schools in all. If your school is dilapidated, you should have a new one.

About 60 percent of schools – we have about 40,000 schools – need current repairs and 10 percent major repairs. Funds have been allocated for all these projects, including for the construction of new schools and major repairs. The programme is practically ready and will be carried out. All the leaders of your region have to do is submit the relevant applications, and we will certainly help you.

Natalya Tolmacheva: Thank you very much.

Vladimir Putin: You are welcome. I wish you all the best and a nice day to your kids.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: I am being told that Yelena Kalinina is with us.

Vladimir Putin: Is she? Please.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Ms Kalinina, can you hear us?

Oh well, it looks like we will not be able to talk to Novokuznetsk.

Vladimir Putin: Perhaps your superiors do not want us to.

Nailya Asker-zade: The connection seems to get blocked.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: They are putting up all kinds of obstacles.

Yelena Kalinina: No, they do not want us to talk.

Vladimir Putin: Now I can hear you.

Go ahead.

Yelena Kalinina: Hello.

Vladimir Putin: Hello.

Yelena Kalinina: Here you go. Our kindergarten, our kindergarten-school No. 235 for children with special needs opened in 1982, or 40 years ago next year.

You see, we get absolutely no help. We recently opened an experimental class. My grandson was in it. He studied for two years with this class.

The kindergarten has a badly leaking roof. We have asked the authorities about it. We asked and begged. They promised, but nothing was done until I directly appealed to you.

Nailya Asker-zade: The connection is still very bad.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: But we got the gist of the problem.

Vladimir Putin: We got it.

Ms Kalinina, can you hear us?

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: I think Ms Kalinina will watch us on television when she gets a chance. I am sure all of Novokuznetsk is following this story.

Vladimir Putin: The problem with the school is clear.

Nailya Asker-zade: Would you like to clarify about the kindergarten?

Vladimir Putin: Apparently, the school and kindergarten are one facility. I got it.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Mr President, what would your comment be?

Vladimir Putin: What is happening to Ms Kalinina herself?

Nailya Asker-zade: She has been receiving threats.

Vladimir Putin: From who?

Nailya Asker-zade: Apparently, from the administration of this kindergarten. They told her she should not have reported this issue to the President.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: The Department of Education called her.

Vladimir Putin: This is the Kemerovo Region, right?

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Novokuznetsk. She was threatened. They told her she would lose custody of her granddaughter.

Vladimir Putin: Custody of her granddaughter? Because she reported this problem to us?

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Correct.

Vladimir Putin: Ms Kalinina, if you can hear us, please do not worry about custody of your granddaughter. There is no such problem anymore. Anyone who threatened you needs to worry about their own problems.

As concerns the school, I just answered a similar question. We have a budget of tens of billions of rubles for the construction and renovation of schools, both major repairs and maintenance.

Do you have any information on this school?

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Of course.

Vladimir Putin: I will talk to the Governor. It is the Kemerovo Region, I think.

Nailya Asker-zade: Yes, the Kemerovo Region. Their Governor is Sergei Tsivilev.

Vladimir Putin: (Addressing Sergei Tsivilev.) Mr Tsivilev, I am also asking you to address this issue and apply to the school renovation programme in due time. Since this school and kindergarten are one facility, it is only one job instead of two. And please make sure to deal with the authorities who are threatening the same people they are supposed to be serving.

I hope you will take timely and adequate decisions. Please report to me on the outcome.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Colleagues, we are going back to the Message Processing Centre. Natalya Yuryeva, please go ahead.

Natalya Yuryeva: Thank you.

We also have examples of how the problem was resolved even before our programme started. Malika Aliyeva from Maikop has asked you for help, Mr President, and I know that the volunteers managed to help her. Sirin Hamida talked to the girl and her mother.

Sirin, please share with us what was done to help Malika.

Sirin Hamida: Mr President, unfortunately, 13-year-old Malika lost her eyesight when she was just six. We were touched by her story and asked the Russian Popular Front for help. The Front activists teamed up with the volunteers and found sponsors who bought a Braille display for Malika.

Natalya Yuryeva: Mr President, Malika wondered whether it was possible to include these modern Russian developments on the list of technical rehabilitation equipment that the state provides free of charge.

Vladimir Putin: We have a list of the rehabilitation equipment for people with disabilities approved by the Government and the Healthcare Ministry. Moreover, there are plans, which are being implemented, for contactless electronic appeals, so that people do not only choose a particular device or a piece of rehabilitation equipment on their own, but also receive payment via the Treasury. This can certainly be done, and we will do so. I am sure that the Government members can hear me, including Deputy Prime Minister [Tatyana] Golikova and Healthcare Minister [Mikhail] Murashko. Please include Braille display on the list of such rehabilitation equipment.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Mr President, we will continue with our screen, we have not used it for a while. The big topic is Social Policy, and the sub-topic is the Labour Market. There are also many calls and messages here. Let's give the floor to the village of Abatskoye. This is a video message.

Svetlana Shtrakhova: Good afternoon, Mr President,

Vladimir Putin: Good afternoon.

Svetlana Shtrakhova: I am a resident of Abatskoye, a village in the Tyumen Region. My name is Svetlana Shtrakhova, and I am 51 years old.

For four years now, I have been unable to find a job. I asked the governor and other authorities to help, but no one wants to resolve the issue. When will there finally be jobs in Russia for everyone, young people and people of my age alike? Everyone is tired of unemployment-related problems.

Thank you. Goodbye.

Vladimir Putin: Ms Shtrakhova, of course, the labour market and employment is an issue of fundamental importance. When employed, people are not just busy; they feel they are needed and independent, and this is one of the most important areas that the state as a whole and municipal and regional leaders should address.

The Tyumen Region is one of our leading regions in terms of income levels and development rates; therefore, the Tyumen Region leaders should, of course, focus more on the problems you just mentioned.

Unfortunately, unemployment has increased in our country during the pandemic. Before we started fighting COVID, the total unemployment rate was 4.6–4.7 percent. Alas, it increased to over 6 percent at some point and is now around 5.9 percent, going down already.

The Government has a goal to get back up to the pre-crisis level of 4.6–4.7 percent. This trend is, fortunately, emerging now and we must do what we can to maintain it because, in the long run, it contributes to economic development and ensures that people have a decent income.

If you have not been able to find a job for a long time, it is even sadder because it is not directly related to COVID-19. Of course, the Tyumen Region, which receives proper funding from the federal budget and has rather good economic indicators, should address this issue more thoroughly. But I am certain that your Governor can hear us, and I hope that he will pay more attention to the town from which you are calling.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: I am being told that the bad connection with Yelena Kalinina was not a coincidence. Apparently, there have been major DDoS-attacks on our digital systems which are still happening as we speak.

Nailya Asker-zade: Hackers.

Vladimir Putin: Are you kidding? Seriously?

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Yes. Even hackers are watching us. That is good to know.

Nailya Asker-zade: The whole world talks about supposed Russian hackers when there are…

Vladimir Putin: Hackers from Kuzbass.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: We will try to fix our systems shortly.

Nailya Asker-zade: Now let’s move on to cultural affairs, a topic which does not get enough attention. Here is a message we received: “I am a teacher of literature and I work in a village. Our people are not rich. My students could go to the regional centre but they simply have no money to buy theatre or museum tickets. Is there any way to help our students?”

Vladimir Putin: Who sent this?

Nailya Asker-zade: The woman did not introduce herself. She just sent this message.

Vladimir Putin: And she is a teacher?

Nailya Asker-zade: She teaches Russian and literature.

Vladimir Putin: We have a proposal that has been discussed by the Government for a few months. We want to name it Pushkin Card. It would be a way to distribute small funds among people aged 14 to 22 specifically for this purpose.

Students will be able to use the funds between September and December of this year and next year. Each card holder would receive 3,000 rubles for four months. Why 3,000? Because even if they want to go to the Bolshoi Theatre, they would still be able to do it. As far as I know, Bolshoi tickets are fairly pricy so this allowance could be spent at once. But in other cases, this money can be spent on concert tickets, museums, exhibitions and other cultural events. I really hope that young people will take advantage of this new opportunity and visit not only regional but national cultural venues as well.

I think this is important for young people. Many want…

Nailya Asker-zade: Of course, they want to do something with their free time.

Vladimir Putin: Not only that. Many want to learn more about our cultural heritage but they have to save a lot first. I hope that when it comes to culture, they will not have to save too much. Their expenses will be covered by the state.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Mr President, let us open the section Domestic Policy, and the sub-section Federal Power.

Vladimir Putin: Fine.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: I hope nothing will prevent us from airing a call from Krasnodar.

Vladimir Putin: Yes, please.

Nikolai Dolzhenko: Mr President,

You came to power after Boris Yeltsin passed it on to you of his own free will. Is such a transfer of power possible today? Do you have a member of your team that you could transfer power to without any doubts?

Vladimir Putin: Mr Dolzhenko, look. Boris Yeltsin did not hand over this power to me. The point is that according to our law, our Fundamental Law, if the President resigns, the Prime Minister of the Russian Federation becomes Acting President. I was the Prime Minister.

I will tell you straight, and there are no secrets here, this decision was preceded by other events. At one time, I was the Director of the Federal Security Service (FSS). When Boris Yeltsin offered me the position of Secretary of the Security Council, the organisation that coordinates the work of government agencies on behalf of the President at the political level, I had to choose a successor for the position of FSS Director, on the President’s instructions.

To my surprise, the people I offered this job to refused. Why? The situation in the country was very complicated and not everyone, in fact, very few, wanted to assume this responsibility. In addition, when Boris Yeltsin suggested I present myself in the polls in the future, I said: “Mr Yeltsin, I do not think I am ready for this.” He replied: “We will come back to that. Think it over.”

Eventually, Boris Yeltsin resigned and I became Acting President. However, in the final analysis, the decision of who is to head the Russian state rests with Russian citizens. They exercise this right of choice by direct secret ballot. This is the only way it can go.

As for who could lead the country, on the one hand, nature abhors a vacuum and nobody is irreplaceable. On the other hand, it is my responsibility to recommend people who might be qualified to run for the presidency. This is how it works in most countries in the world. I do not know of any exceptions. Naturally, the time will come when I hope I will be able to say that a certain person deserves to lead such a wonderful country as our Motherland – Russia.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Colleagues, we are handing it over to the Message Processing Centre again. We are aware that the pulse of the live broadcast and our Direct Line is beating literally at your centre. Please, the floor is yours.

Natalya Yuryeva: Thank you very much.

We have a rather interesting question about foreign, not domestic, policy. Mr President, let us watch a video addressed to you by Andrei Cheremisov from St Petersburg.

Andrei Cheremisov: Good afternoon, Mr President.

My name is Andrei. Not long ago, you met with US President Biden. The media told us that the meeting took place in a constructive manner, but almost immediately Russia was again threatened with all sorts of sanctions and restrictions brought about by either the “German patient” or God knows what else. By way of apology, they are saying that little depends on Biden, and supposedly he does not make all the decisions there. I have a question for you: why meet with President Biden if so little depends on him?

Thank you.

Vladimir Putin: Mr Cheremisov, much depends on the President of the United States, although that country has its own political system with checks and balances, but still a lot depends on him. You raised an important issue, but I believe it should be considered somewhat differently. It is not about whether things depend on the US President or not.

The matter is different. You know, there are children in a family that I am rather close with. There is a little child, who does not even talk yet, and he made a mess, so his mother told him firmly: “Never do that again. Switch on your head.” And at that very moment he did that motion with his finger, said “click” and switched on his head. Good job.

Conventional dads and moms in the United States, highly respected analysts, scientists and practical workers, even in the past, give advice to their political leaders and their political class that is in power in the broad sense of the word. What is this advice? They tell them the following: “Listen, the time when we were an absolute hegemon after the end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union, the period of the unipolar world is gone, and you must operate on the premise that the world is changing, and doing so rapidly.”

No matter what sanctions are being imposed on Russia, and no matter what they do to frighten us, Russia is nonetheless making progress. Its economic sovereignty is growing, its defence capability has reached a very high level, and, in many important parameters, it has surpassed many countries, in some respects, including the United States.

Asia is growing at a very fast pace. Look, in 1991 China's GDP was 20 percent of the US GDP, but today, according to US sources –how much is it? – 120 percent. That is, China’s aggregate GDP has become higher in purchasing power parity than that of the United States. Trade between China and Europe exceeded trade between the United States and its main ally, united Europe.

You see, the world is radically changing. Our partners in the US realise that, on the one hand, and therefore there was this meeting in Geneva. On the other hand, they are trying as hard as they can to maintain their dominant position, and hence you get threats and further destructive behaviour with those military exercises, provocations and sanctions.

It does not depend on us; it depends on them. I really hope that an awareness that the world is changing and a rethinking of their own interests and priorities in this changing world will lead to a more attractive world order, and our relations with the United States will get back on track.

Nailya Asker-zade: Are we going to respond now? Will there be any response measures? We got a text message: “The US speaks about sanctions for crossing ‘red lines.’ Which sanction levers does Russia have to respond to US violations of our ‘red lines’?” asks Andrei Syutkin from Omsk Region.

Vladimir Putin: You know, first, we have not just adapted, our economy has adapted to this sanction pressure. It did us good in a way. These import substitution programmes, replacing imported equipment and technologies with domestically produced ones, gave a good boost to the development of high-tech production. It did us good, really. Not to mention agriculture, which saw a surge we could not even imagine before.

There are other positive things, too.

Nailya Asker-zade: The Mir payment system, for instance.

Vladimir Putin: The Mir payment system and the overall strengthening of the financial system. There are plusses in the fact that we are threatened, restrictions are imposed on our bonds and government loans. The overall debt decreased, the aggregate debt – and not just the sovereign debt, which was low anyway – but also the debt of the commercial sector went down. In general, it also has a certain plus, some positive sides.

But we are not going to take and will not take counter measures that would hurt us. For example, the Americans still fly into space using our engines. Our rocket engines are still being widely used to take US spaceships into orbit. We have been delivering them for a dozen years, why should we stop? To harm ourselves?

Or take another example: Boeing builds its planes from our titanium. I am not sure about the exact volumes but probably at least 50 percent of the planes. So what, should we close down titanium production in our country?

If they cross certain lines, we find asymmetrical responses which are pretty sensitive for our partners. Let me repeat: I hope the US will change this attitude not only towards us but also to many of their other partners.

By the way, do you think their traditional partners and even allies are happy that they are being spoken to arrogantly? Nobody likes that.

Nailya Asker-zade: I suggest moving forward. You mentioned the economy. Let us talk more about that.

Vladimir Putin: Please, go ahead.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Let us take a look at where we stand regarding salary payments. We have a direct video call from the Trans-Baikal Territory. Shall we?

Vladimir Putin: With pleasure.

Nailya Asker-zade: Mr Perfilyev, you are on the air.

Dmitry Perfilyev: Good afternoon, Mr President.

This appeal comes to you from the employees of…

Nailya Asker-zade: I am sorry, Mr Perfilyev, could you please turn off the television so that we can hear you better? Sorry, there are problems with the signal.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: If it is on and is near you, it can interfere.

Dmitry Perfilyev: No, there is no television here, I am using the app.

Nailya Asker-zade: Please, go ahead.

Vladimir Putin: Please.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Let us call him back.

Vladimir Putin: Mr Perfilyev, we cannot hear you well.

Nailya Asker-zade: While we are restoring communication with Mr Perfilyev and the village of Mangut, let us see what is going on with our colleagues.

Vladimir Putin: Mr Perfilyev, wait, maybe you just need to speak a little slower and less loudly? Because I can hear you when you start talking, and then something happens and we lose the connection.

Nailya Asker-zade: Perhaps you can bring the telephone closer to your mouth?

Vladimir Putin: Yes, perhaps, not so loud, and slower.

Dmitry Perfilyev: Yes, Mr President, understood.

Nailya Asker-zade: Please go ahead; we can hear you well now.

Dmitry Perfilyev: Mr President, contrary to the list in Presidential Instructions No. 1180 dated July 2, 2019, at many regional agencies, including Zabaikalpozhspas, the salaries of firefighters have remained at minimum wage level, regardless of their position. Also, the regional firefighting team… (sound fails) <…> Mr. President, please [help resolve] these issues, low wages, and the lack of benefits. (sound fails) <…>

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Mr President, if I can clarify …

Nailya Asker-zade: I understand the problem is that the salaries remain at minimum wage level.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: The fact is these are municipal department firefighters; they are not Emergencies Ministry employees.

Vladimir Putin: Give us a moment, ladies. Mr Perfilyev and I will figure it out.

Mr Perfilyev, this is about increasing salaries, is it not?

Dmitry Perfilyev: It is.

Vladimir Putin: I have a question in this regard. Is your organisation part of the Emergencies Ministry, or is it a regional structure?

Dmitry Perfilyev: Zabaikalpozhspas is a regional structure.

Vladimir Putin: Is it regional? Not the Emergencies Ministry, right?

Dmitry Perfilyev: Not the Emergencies Ministry.

Vladimir Putin: Not the Emergencies Ministry, I see.

Can you hear me well?

Dmitry Perfilyev: Mr President, we hear you very well.

Vladimir Putin: Excellent.

Look, when we talked, and I spoke two years ago or last year about the need to raise salaries for the staff – not officers, but the staff of the Emergencies Ministry fire services, it was done.

They used to get 16, and now they get 32 and more, around 40,000 rubles, and a little more. They also have a problem because they began to fill the vacancies and the money allocated to them began to trickle away. In addition, they had to raise the salaries in the Arctic region. Nevertheless, we are keeping it under our control.

I take it and you have said that you are a regional structure.

Dmitry Perfilyev: Yes, exactly right.

Vladimir Putin: It means that at the regional level, in the majority of regions, when we raised the salaries for the Emergencies Ministry staff, salaries were also raised for their regional staff because otherwise the personnel migrate. I am sorry, what region are you from?

Dmitry Perfilyev: Trans-Baikal Territory.

Vladimir Putin: Clearly it depends on the fiscal capacity. Nevertheless, I will definitely speak to the governor, because, firstly, you have a hard and unsafe job, and it should be properly remunerated and marked. Secondly, there is another problem, which is personnel outflow. Ultimately the governor will not have the workers he needs, especially in the current situation when we, regretfully. are facing wildfire issues. I got it and I repeat: this lies within the governor’s authority, but we will certainly talk about that.

Dmitry Perfilyev: Thank you, Mr President.

Vladimir Putin: It is too early to thank me. I hope there will be a response from the governor.

Nailya Asker-zade: Thank you very much, Mr Perfilyev.

Vladimir Putin: Thank you. Thank you and your colleagues, and as they say in such situations, I would like to take this opportunity to thank everyone who is currently putting out wildfires under very complicated conditions. This work is very important, not only economically but also in terms of protecting people’s interests.

Thank you very much. I will be sure to speak to the governor.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: I am being told that our colleagues in the call centre have many messages about the trash reform following the environmental topic. Let us give the floor to Natalia Yuryeva.

Natalya Yuryeva: That is correct, colleagues. But I must say that our editorial office has already received almost 2,200,000 messages, and they include plenty of questions about the trash reform. Irina Politova, a volunteer, has been processing all the messages on this topic for almost two weeks.

Irina, how many questions have you studied altogether?

Irina Politova: Probably several thousand.

Natalya Yuryeva: That is, all the messages without exaggeration?

Irina Politova: All of them, but they keep coming up to this day.

Natalya Yuryeva: What worries our people most of all?

Irina Politova: I think the most outrageous problem is unfair fees for trash pickup. The majority of the regions calculate them based on the area of a flat rather than the number of people who live there. As a result, a lonely pensioner from a three-room flat pays more than his neighbours, a family with many children from a small flat.

Natalya Yuryeva: And he has less trash.

Irina Politova: Of course.

Another big problem in the regions is the absence of recycling plants. Landfills are packed; rubbish is flying around, burning, and people are suffocating.

Mr President, there is a collective address to you about this problem from the residents of Selenginsk.

Natalya Yuryeva: And I know that we have photos. Editors, could you please show them on air? It is a pity TV does not transmit smells. Otherwise, it would have been possible to feel the pain of these people.

Irina Politova: Yes, this is a huge problem in the Republic of Buryatia. We received a complaint from 71 people, including veterans of the Great Patriotic War and home-front workers. They are begging you to save their village from an environmental disaster. In the village of Vasilyevskoye, Tver Region, people have to travel three km to get rid of their trash in a neighbouring village because there is simply no dumpster in their own village.

Natalya Yuryeva: Mr President, people are also concerned about why trash is collected separately and then thrown into the same rubbish truck? Also, what can be done to compel the managing companies to stop subverting the trash reform?

Vladimir Putin: The trash reform requires a lot of work throughout the country. It is not the first time that we are addressing this problem, but, as you know, nobody has dealt with it seriously since the Soviet times. True, probably we did not have as much waste in the past as we do now, owing to the transition to a consumer society, as they say.

Now we produce 60 million tonnes of waste every year, and we are only taking the first steps towards resolving this problem. We have received the first investment for the separate collection of 10 million tonnes of trash and for the processing of three million tonnes. As you see, the remainder is huge.

In the years to come, we must build waste incineration plants, although there are certainly problems here, as well. I am aware of the fact that many local residents in the places where these plants are supposed to be built are anxious and have many questions. I want you to be mindful of the fact that no country around the world can do without this kind of waste disposal, and there are types of waste that can be destroyed only by fire. For example, our doctors in the red zones and clinics wear something that is known as a “spacesuit.” It is impossible to dispose of these without incinerating them.

So, in addition to separating trash and the early phases of recycling, we are beginning the practical implementation of these tasks with plans to build five plants. The government is considering the option to expand this programme, it will involve a lot of work, and there are many aspects to it. For example, some packaging manufacturers – and experts are telling us that 50 percent of what we send to the trash can is packaging, for example, cardboard, all kinds of paper – they decided that they could create processing capacity. Glass manufacturers believe that it makes more economic sense to pay a disposal fee, and the Government is now working to build corresponding relations with them in order to collect these funds and use them for recycling this type of waste.

I repeat, this is a major challenge, but we are not going to interrupt these efforts for a second. Of course, the most extreme cases require a prompt response, including the landfills you mentioned. We will try to make note of this for ourselves and respond accordingly in conjunction with the authorities.

But there are things that are absolutely unacceptable. I am talking about what was just said. When – and people are rightfully outraged by this – they make an effort to follow the recommendations of the authorities, separate their trash, and then all of it is dumped and mixed up in a lorry. This is, without a doubt, a lack of proper organisation by the respective operators, who need to be held accountable for their actions. In this case, without doubt, the prompt reaction of residents, public organisations and the Russian Popular Front is of great help.

To put it in a broader perspective, we – I want to return to this subject – will move on to have packaging manufacturers bear expanded responsibility. That is, once you produce the packaging, you will be held responsible for it until it is disposed of properly, either by directly disposing of the packaging, or by paying a certain amount to the state so that it can take care of it itself.

We will try to respond to the most outrageous cases if we have addresses and feedback.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Mr President, we will continue.

Tatyana Remezova has the floor.

Vladimir Putin: Yes, please.

Tatyana Remezova: Thank you, Yekaterina.

Ecology is not just trash processing, it also means clean water and clean air, of course. Omsk has become an anti-leader in this respect, an absolute anti-leader.

Here is just one of the messages: “We are forced to check the air outside the window before taking our child out for a walk,” writes Yevgenia Rogozina from Omsk. Nadeshda Kasatova urges the federal government to move to Omsk: “Let them breathe our odours.”

Let us try to connect Omsk to our live feed. We open Ecology, Environmental Pollution. I see we have a direct video call from Omsk.

Vladimir Putin: Go ahead.

Tatyana Remezova: Hello, you are on the air. The President can hear you.

Vladimir Putin: Hello.

Vladimir Lifantyev: Hello, Mr President. My name is Vladimir, I am calling from Omsk. Our question is indeed about ecology. In 2018, Omsk was included in the 12 cities – participants in the Ecology national project, the Clean Air federal project. But we have not seen any changes, and now it is June 30, 2021. Total emissions were to decrease by 20 percent as per your executive order, however, we were being poisoned with coal soot, formaldehyde or hydrogen chloride, and excess levels of these pollutants are still being recorded. We have very bad statistics regarding lung diseases, respiratory tract diseases and oncology. Mr President, we are calling on you for help today so that you can use your influence with the companies that are ignoring the May executive orders, and the overall system so that we can take a full breath and stop living in a gas chamber.

(Shouting together.) We are pleading!

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: It is a joint address.

Vladimir Putin: I hear you. Mr Lifantyev and all the others next to you – the adults and children – I have the following to say: I heard there was a suggestion to move the federal government to Omsk; you know, that would not resolve the issue. Moreover, I personally think that certain federal organisations should be moved to Siberia, at least our larger companies and their head offices, which operate in Siberia but pay most of their taxes, unfortunately, in Moscow. However, this is a separate issue.

Regarding the environment. Look, the situation became worse objectively over the decades, not as a result of actions by the Government of the Russian Federation or even new Russian authorities in the broad sense of the word. These enterprises, as you are aware yourselves, have been there for decades, and they are the polluters.

The biggest polluters are industrial companies. The second biggest polluter is the utility system, especially during the heating season if the primary fuel sources are coal or heating oil. And the third is transport.

Indeed, regarding Omsk, it was included in the 12 cities in a difficult situation. But a reduction [of emissions] up to 20 percent is to be in place by 2024, and I really hope that despite all the problems it will happen.

I am perfectly aware that living under such conditions is unfortunate; I understand this perfectly, however, this work is ongoing. Now I will tell you what the local and the central authorities have managed to do and in which areas.

There is more to it than just Omsk being included on the list of the 12 cities where this required reduction of 20 percent by 2024 has been scheduled. Specific actions are being taken. For example, as far as I know, there was a report out there recently – I am aware of the developments and I keep handy the information about what is going on in these 12 cities. Omsk, I believe, has four large landfills, correct?

Vladimir Lifantyev: Six large landfills, and five participants in the Clean Country programme. I could be off with my numbers.

Vladimir Putin: My documents show four large landfills.

The corresponding local and regional authorities can submit an application for action regarding these landfills. The Governor signed two applications. Unfortunately, there are still no applications for two landfills, and this is something that local and regional authorities should certainly focus on, and this work needs to be sped up.

The second thing is you have a large oil refinery operated by GazpromNeft, I believe, and there is a fairly large accumulation of sediment and slag. This matter is still being finalised with the company's management. It is a powerful and good high-tech company, and they promise to recycle 50 percent of this landfill by 2023.

Why only 50? We need to proceed carefully so as not to stir up this landfill in such a way that it creates even more problems than we already have. But this work will be seen to the end.

Finally, public transport is one of the polluters, as I said earlier. There is some progress. It was decided to upgrade transport in the cities with an unfavourable environmental situation, and Omsk is one of those. We must give credit to the leadership of Omsk Region. The Omsk Region Government has prepared and defended this programme, and it was submitted to the Government, and we will start working on updating urban transport with an eye to reducing emissions.

Overall, the situation calls for taking more drastic action. For example, we are now moving to using the best available technology at our companies. But we can go beyond that. First, the number of Roshydromet stations needs to be increased, it is necessary to set up emissions measurement tools in spite of everything, even though industry officials, including regional officials, are telling us it will be expensive, and to respond accordingly to ongoing developments.

Rest assured that we will continue to work on this. I want to tell you, Mr Lifantyev, and everyone who is standing next to you, and all Omsk residents, that we will keep working on it.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Look, everyone is wearing masks.

Vladimir Putin: You are all wearing masks, which is great, yes.

Vladimir Lifantyev: May I have a quick word?

Vladimir Putin: Please, go ahead.

Vladimir Lifantyev: It would be great if you could give the supervisory authorities a little more push, because there are enterprises in Omsk that have been ignoring Rosprirodnadzor requirements for nine years now. We have two chemical lakes in our municipality.

Vladimir Putin: I will definitely look at that. Let us agree that I have marked these issues. After all, it is not even about them having more authority. Most importantly, they should respond to these events in a timely manner. We will definitely take a look at what is going on there.

Vladimir Lifantyev: Thank you very much.

Vladimir Putin: No, thank you for paying attention to this and keeping an eye on it, and I strongly hope that you will continue to do so, since public control in these matters is of critical importance.

Nailya Asker-zade: The next question. Mr President, we currently have flash flooding in Crimea, a heat wave in Moscow, and now wildfires in Siberia. “What is going on with the climate? Why has nature gone mad?” a TV viewer is asking you, for some reason.

Vladimir Putin: Where from?

Nailya Asker-zade: Unfortunately, it does not say here.

Vladimir Putin: There is much talk about this all over the world. This is one of the most urgent and most debated topics related to climate change and global warming. Many believe, with good reason, that it is connected primarily to human activity, to emissions of pollutants into the atmosphere, mostly CO2.

Why is the situation so bad? Not because the climate changes periodically in different parts of the Earth but because some people believe that as the climate is changing in different areas and all over the planet, it will approach a dangerous limit, and if people add more, it will contribute to global warming, then irreversible processes may start which could bring our planet to Venus’s condition, where the surface temperature is around 500 degrees Celsius. This is what environmentalists are concerned about, as well those who warn us about these possible developments that are unfavourable for the entire world.

It may be right or wrong, but we must certainly do our best to minimise our contribution to the developments in the global sphere, including in the Universe in general. Because we are part of the Universe, and although we cannot influence what happens there, if there is something we can influence, we must do it.

Let me repeat, global change, global warming is happening in our country even faster than in many other regions of the world. Actually, not just in our country but along that latitude, including the Scandinavian countries. What consequences does this imply for us? There are apparently some advantages, however, but there are significant disadvantages. First, a part of our territory, about 70 percent, is situated in northern latitudes, and there are large areas of permafrost.

As a reminder, permafrost is frozen ground dozens or even hundreds of metres deep, and maybe even up to 1,000 metres in some places. We have towns and villages there as well as infrastructure, and if the permafrost should start to thaw, this would lead to grave social and economic consequences. Of course, we must be prepared for this. This is the first thing I want to say.

The second. Some areas might be overtaken by deserts, including those which are traditionally seen in Russia as land suitable for farming. This also needs to be considered.

We are carrying out all our obligations under international resolutions, including those under the Paris Agreements. Prior to that there were the Kyoto Agreements, and we were also a party to them. We have assumed serious obligations that, in some respects, are not only not inferior to those of the European Union, but even tougher when it comes to the amount of [carbon] emissions to be reduced. I have no doubt we will be doing all this.

Incidentally, this has an effect on the environment and involves the use of the latest modern technology, as well as efforts to ensure environmental safety. We will be doing this in 12 cities, including Omsk, and in other major localities – we will not tell you now how many there will be, it will depend on what is happening there to the environment.

We also have specific plans. For example, the Government has recently developed a plan for a response to more climate change, should it occur, for the most sensitive activities and industries, including residential development and road construction. Clearly, it is one thing to build a road in Krasnodar Territory and quite another in Yakutia; these are different situations which need different approaches and technology. The Government has just developed a response system for the 10 most important critical industries. We will be responding appropriately and contributing to international efforts; we will be doing more to tap our potential for the absorption of CO2 in the atmosphere. Our potential is huge and we will be boosting it. Incidentally, referring to the firefighters who spoke earlier – their role is great because the absorbing capacity of our forests, seas and our part of the ocean is extremely important and we must preserve it. Of course, in this sense their role is also great and what they are doing is very important. But we will be preparing for what inevitably may happen.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Mr President, with regard to the climate in international relations, people are asking about relations with our close neighbours. Let us give the floor to Balashikha.

Yerem Harutyunyan: Mr President,

I am Yerem Harutyunyan, an 11th grade student from Balashikha, outside Moscow.

Before I ask my question, I would like to once again emphasise the crucial role of the Russian Federation and yours personally in settling the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict and to thank you for this.

Here is my question: can Russia guarantee Nagorno-Karabakh residents’ safety?

Thank you.

Vladimir Putin: Indeed, Yerem, Russia has played a specfic role in resolving this very serious crisis.

No one is interested in seeing it continue: neither Azerbaijan, nor Armenia, let alone Nagorno-Karabakh residents, because the other side of the matter is that if we all live in peace and friendship, then we will create proper conditions for improving people's lives, not only in terms of security, but also in the current circumstances. I mean normal lives for families, for economic and social development, which, of course, the Karabakh people need, because it is impossible to live thinking all the time that an armed conflict can reignite any time. We understand this very well. The leaders of Armenia and Azerbaijan understand this as well.

Yes, there is a backlog of issues. There are issues related to rebuilding the infrastructure. There are issues related to demarcation of the border in order to carry out appropriate work on the state border between Armenia and Azerbaijan, especially in places where a border has never existed as such and was only an administrative border between the union republics.

We are now in the process of doing this. We have created a special trilateral group with Russia, Azerbaijan and Armenia. We will do our best to restore normal relations in the region. The people of Nagorno-Karabakh should be the beneficiaries of this work. I would like to think that this will be the case despite the difficulties that have been piling up for decades.

Nailya Asker-Zade: Elections to the State Duma will be held in Russia in September. You addressed the congress of the United Russia party. Why are you supporting the party of power so consistently, and what is your opinion of the outgoing parliament’s performance?

Vladimir Putin: Let us begin with the outgoing parliament, and I will speak about the party of power later.

I believe that the parliament of the seventh convocation did not just work in a satisfactory manner but at the appropriate level. The results of this work were fully in keeping with the circumstances and the requirements set to Russia’s supreme representative and legislative body.

It is clear what I am referring to. I mean that for a long time, this past time, the deputies have been working in conditions of the pandemic. They had to continue working despite the threats and challenges, including to their lives and health. They had to gather in the voting hall and make decisions bearing on the most important spheres of the country’s development. They needed to provide assistance to people, to families, enterprises and entire economic sectors. If this had not been done, the situation in Russia would have been much more complicated. As you are aware, and nearly everyone supports this view, we covered the worst part of the road with losses, but not as dramatical as in many other countries, including thanks to the State Duma deputies from all factions, which I would like to emphasise. About 25 percent of the members of parliament caught the coronavirus, and four passed away. But the deputies continued working and doing their duty. I believe that they deserve respect and gratitude not only from me but also from the voters who will come to polling stations in September.

As for the party of power, everyone knows that life is not all about fun and giving away money. It is very easy and pleasant to throw money around, just like the sower on the famous painting. But the seeds will eventually run out, and it is not a fact that they will germinate. Therefore, decisions must be made with a clear vision, as people say, professionally and with a sense of responsibility for the decisions made.

I would like to say once again that a vast number of decisions were made in the 1990s just to please the public, and these decisions were made by those who knew that they could not be implemented. What is this? This is deceiving the voters, deceiving our citizens so as to present oneself as the defender of the people and later to shift the blame for failure to implement these decisions onto someone else. As I said, they usually knew in advance that their decisions could not be implemented.

This is not how United Russia is acting, even when we adopt unpopular decisions that are necessary for the people and the future of the country. United Russia deputies do so, even if it can damage them. Because it is sometimes impossible to explain some decisions in detail, even though they are necessary. As I said, we need to do this. But all of this, the work of United Russia is creating a solid foundation of the Russian statehood in terms of the guaranteed adoption of the decisions the country needs. This is why, and also because I was the founder, the creator of this party, it is logical that I support it. Ultimately, this conversation and my answer to your question show that I intend to support the party during its election campaign.

Nailya Asker-Zade: Thank you.

Let us go to the Message Processing Centre and ask our colleagues if they are getting bored. How is it going, girls, Tatyana?

Tatyana Remezova: No, Nailya, we are not bored at all. We receive very many questions when the President goes on air. You understand how rapidly the number of requests increases when people see that this is live streaming, real-time communication with the President.

Mr President, the European football championship is underway. You mentioned it at the beginning, but people continue asking questions. Here is one of them: “Mr President, the Russian national team has not gotten out of the group at EURO 2020. Some time ago, our hockey team tumbled out of the world championship in the quarter-finals. What is your personal view of this embarrassment? Russia, which has a population of 147 million, must show different results. Thank you.” This question came from Svetlana Tokareva in Lipetsk.

Vladimir Putin: This is what sport is like. There can be triumphs, and there can be losses and failures. But it is a fact that our hockey team, not to mention the football team, did badly, and this cannot go unnoticed.

I will not go into detail now; we have specialists for that. Although I am a master of two sports, sambo and judo, I do not consider myself a specialist in hockey or football, and so we must trust the specialists. But in such cases, as they say, “nothing personal,” this can happen to anyone.

But we simply need to think about what positive things have been done by those who are responsible for the performance of our national teams, we must put our heads together to think what must be changed when it comes to both hockey and football players, and move on, without crying over spilt milk but hoping for the best.

We certainly have a good potential.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Mr President, sport can be recreational for some people. But many others believe that recreation means traveling. Maybe many of those who are watching us now do not want to sit in front of their television sets but would rather go to the seaside or a health resort. Of course, COVID has closed the borders one way or another. On the other hand, many people have discovered their own country, and more than that.

Nailya Asker-Zade: Yes, they have also discovered problems, because prices in Crimea, Sochi and on Lake Baikal are sometimes higher than abroad, while the quality of services is below foreign standards.

I suggest taking up the issue of tourism, in particular, internal tourism. Shall we take a question from Kirov? What does this girl want to ask?

Good afternoon, Alyona. You are on air.

Alyona Maslennikova: Good afternoon, Mr President.

Vladimir Putin: Good afternoon.

Alyona Maslennikova: Mr President, please tell me why is it more expensive to spend a vacation at a Russian resort than abroad? For instance, for 35,000–40,000 rubles, we can fly to Turkey on an all-inclusive tour. It will include a four-star hotel, three meals a day, picturesque views, and the clearest sea. In Sochi, for the same amount of money, you will get a three-star hotel, with only breakfasts included, and the sea will be so unclean that it can give you various infections. Many holidaymakers complain about illnesses after visiting the Black Sea coast. I think this is why Russian tourists do not want to visit the Russian south, especially if they have been abroad and can see the difference for themselves. Even if they cannot visit Turkey, they will stay away from Russia’s overpriced southern resorts.

Vladimir Putin: What can I say, Alyona? The answer is out in the open. Unfortunately, very little money has been invested in the development of our tourist capacities and infrastructure for a very long time. People preferred to travel abroad as soon as this opportunity was available to them.

Tourism export is huge in Russia; in 2019 alone, our tourists spent $36 billion on travelling abroad. It is a huge sum. The state, unfortunately, did not invest.

We have a programme designed to develop domestic tourism, there is a cashback project for tourists, and there is the task of developing the tourist infrastructure. We have recently created a state corporation for domestic tourism. It will be responsible for tourist projects and provide cheap loans with the possibility of later transfering its share to private entrepreneurs at market prices. The first steps have already been taken and domestic tourism is growing.

As for overpriced services, yes, it seems to be relevant. But why is this happening today? Most foreign countries, despite the fact that some of them are opening, are still closed. People are cautious about travelling abroad. In fact, they are right because these countries keep changing their rules every day. Greece yesterday had certain rules and tomorrow they will change. First, they required vaccination certificates, now they want PCR tests, and tomorrow they will want something else because the European Commission also has its own requirements. It is impossible to get to a hospital there. What is this going to lead to? It will lead to an excessive load on our tourist infrastructure, above all, in the south, in Krasnodar Territory and Crimea. As soon as supply cannot keep up with demand, prices tend to rise. It is how market economy works.

I strongly hope that we will increase our capacities, including in the ways I have mentioned; 50 projects are already being considered and we are going to increase this number.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Let us proceed.

Mr President, a question from Miscellaneous and Personal, one of my favourites.

Vladimir Putin: Please.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: It is about recreation again.

“Mr President, do you sing when you are not working? If so, which songs do you sing?”

Vladimir Putin: (Laughs) Yes, it is about recreation again.

First of all, I have little time for recreation, and second, as we say, when people are winding down, they get together, and then they have a drink, and if they do they also sing. I am a Russian, after all, and so I am not much different from the majority of our people in this sense. What songs? I sing Russian, Soviet songs. They are melodic, beautiful and meaningful.

Nailya Asker-Zade: Let us go to the Message Processing Centre.

Natalya, can you hear me?

Natalya Yuryeva: Yes, thank you. I believe that those who have sent us the following questions would definitely sing The Roads. The majority of text messages include photographs of roads, or rather their absence.

For example, if we take a look at the image we received from the village of Alekseyevka in Smolensk Region, we will be unable to see either a bridge or a road. They are there, but they have been flooded.

And this is the road leading to School No. 39 in Taganrog.

The residents of Nizhnekamsk have measured the depth of the potholes in their roads: 25 centimetres.

Let us watch a video address not from Venice, but from Lesosibirsk. Its roads have become canals or even rivers.

Natalya Prokopyeva: Good afternoon.

Mr President,

I am addressing you on behalf of the residents of Borovoi district of Lesosibirsk, Krasnoyarsk Territory. We are asking you to help us resolve this problem.

This is the road running through our area. When the road across the railway line was repaired last year, the water drain pipe was not laid correctly. Now water is not being drained, but is rising with every passing day. This is how vehicles drive on this road, at their own risk and peril.

We have appealed to the city administration several times, but we have not yet received a single reply regarding our problem. We are asking you to help us.

Vladimir Putin: Ms Prokopyeva, we know about the problem with roads; we are constantly hearing about it.

What can I tell you and the other people who come across similar problems, because many people in the country, in various regions are listening to us? Our roads are divided into several categories: federal roads, regional roads and local roads. We have about 60,000 kilometres of federal roads, if memory serves, and over 500,000 kilometres of regional roads. There are about a million kilometres of local roads.

With regard to federal motorways, during the first phase, the state engaged precisely with these, because these are the main motorways that are used for hauling goods and transporting people; they form the backbone of the entire network. About 85 percent of them have been brought up to code. By 2024, 50 percent of the regional motorways must be brought up to code as well, and then up to 80–85 percent of the regional motorways must be brought to code.

Different approaches are being used, including full cycle, where they build and then do the roadworks themselves. In your particular case, you should have done just that, so that, as part of the full cycle project, those who built this road also do the maintenance. Meaning that they built it, so let them get on and do the maintenance at their own expense. Clearly, this is an oversight on behalf of those who built this road.

I will definitely have a word with Governor Alexander Uss and we will see what can be done about it. The funds are available. I am confident the region has funds as well. If needed, we will, of course, tap into the federal funds, but we will resolve your issue.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Mr President, the question that came to our website from Natalia Skarynina from Chelyabinsk is also about infrastructure: “Use your influence to improve the mass transit situation in our city. The metro has remained an unfinished construction project since the Soviet times.”

Vladimir Putin: Well, yes.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: “So many years have gone by without them doing anything about it, we hear nothing but promises. We are not just a village, but a city with a million-plus residents.”

Vladimir Putin: Well, yes. Is Ms Skarynina listening?

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: We received this message on the website.

Vladimir Putin: This is a well-known story. Indeed, this is unfinished construction, a legacy of Soviet times. It is not the only city of this size to face this kind of a problem. Krasnoyarsk, which I just mentioned, has the same problem.

Deputy Prime Minister Khusnullin traveled to Chelyabinsk on my instruction to get acquainted with the situation there. He reported to me that the issue had been worked through. It should be a hybrid transport service, a cross between the metro and the tram. The central parts, where it is more convenient, should be serviced by the underground lines. These should then come to the surface as the transit lines move away from the centre. It will cost over 40 billion rubles. We have the money to cover this construction not only in Chelyabinsk, but other cities facing the same problem as well.

To reiterate, these funds will be allocated for the infrastructure projects. The amount of funds is quite large at 500 billion rubles. Matters of this kind, including the one in Chelyabinsk, have not only been taken into consideration. The approximate scope of work is quite clear, we have the resources, and all we need to do is start this work just like we did in other cities facing the same issues.

Nailya Asker-zade: I suggest we move on to the Economy. You have announced the extension of the easy-term mortgage lending programme. It will continue in a slightly adjusted form. Do you think this programme has increased housing prices and, thus, the investment effort benefitted the construction rather than the buyers?

Let me give you an example. Last year, prices in new blocks of flats rose by 12 percent. In Krasnodar Territory, the price of 1 square metre has increased by 53 percent this year alone. We received a message from Belgorod: a flat cost 1.5 million, now it costs 3.5 million. Of course, there were other reasons that affected the housing prices, but do you not think that the mortgage lending terms also had a role to play in this?

Vladimir Putin: Then, I want to counter: would it be better not to have done this? By the way, I myself drew attention to this at a Government meeting, it can be easily verified. I just said that we must keep in mind that when we introduce these preferential mechanisms, we must ensure that the market, in this case the construction market, takes them in a proper way so that they do not lead to a price rise. Unfortunately, this is to a certain extent unavoidable since it is based on supply and demand.

Still, these are easy-term loans, despite an increase in prices, which is there, indeed, it is true (although the causes may differ and include the rise in metal prices, other things and inflation, in general). Nevertheless, this easy-term mortgage lending programme played its positive role: housing construction rates and the number of loans increased sharply. More than 500,000 people used this programme. Therefore, we decided to extend it. It will now be 7 percent, not 6.5 percent, for the next year until the summer of 2022, I believe.

Nailya Asker-zade: The amount has changed too.

Vladimir Putin: The amount has been changed. In any case, this programme has been preserved, that is what matters most. Again, they raised it a little, by half of a percentage point.

At the same time, we have retained the benefits associated with providing and helping families with children. The initial benefit was for families with two children, and more recently we decided to extend this benefit to families (at 6 percent) where a child was born in the period since January 2018, the first child. Therefore, I hope that expanded benefits will still be beneficial and the people will be able to take advantage of them.

In the Russian Far East, a certain group of our citizens have access to super-easy mortgage loans at 2 percent APR. Therefore, it is necessary, of course, to increase market supply and to monitor the prices of building materials and other products.

There are also problems associated with labour shortages. During the pandemic, we limited access for labour from the former republics of the Soviet Union, including Central Asia, which also affected the cost of housing, no matter how strange it may seem to someone. But we will continue this work.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Mr President, what do you think about this, as you put it, counter hit? A text message asks: Who is the President subordinate to?

Vladimir Putin: To the Russian people, to the voters.

When people come to vote, they make their choice at every level – local, regional or national. And in this case, of course, the President, the head of state obeys the people who have given him their special trust.

Nailya Asker-zade: I suggest we choose one question on the wall. For example, the Defence and Security category. Let us see, Fighting Crime.

I can see that we have a direct video call from Moscow. Shall we try it?

Vladimir Putin: Yes, please.

Nailya Asker-zade: Hello, please speak up, you are on live.

Rinat Bilyalov: Hello, Mr President.

Vladimir Putin: Hello.

Rinat Bilyalov: My question is rather short.

Today, swindlers are offering fake vaccination certificates or vaccination contraindication certificates. How are you planning to deal with these swindlers?

Vladimir Putin: They are swindlers, pure and simple.

There are Criminal Code articles punishing swindling.

It is just that the law enforcers need to work more efficiently.

They know about this, and so does the Interior Minister. I talked to him about this quite recently. They are working, of course, and they are looking for them. Hopefully they will bring them to justice. This is a very dangerous type of crime. In this case it is also linked to people’s health. It is absolutely unacceptable and the law enforcers should use the entire arsenal at their disposal in order to prevent these offences.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: People in Moscow have been using QR codes to visit cafes for several days now. And, of course, these swindlers are in ever growing demand.

Vladimir Putin: Right, right. The Interior Ministry is aware of this and intends to fight it.

Nailya Asker-zade: I suggest we go back to the vaccination theme, if in a different context: “Please supply an anti-COVID vaccine to the Lugansk People’s Republic and the Donetsk People’s Republic. Thank you very much in advance.” This is a message from Vasily Kuprinenko.

Vladimir Putin: Yes, this is a matter requiring careful consideration. I think several thousand – some 90 thousand – doses of vaccine have been supplied already. But I hear you. An additional shipment will be made.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Mr President, we have been working for over three hours now, or maybe even more. Let us move over to the blitz Q&A: short questions and short answers.

Vladimir Putin: Fine.

Nailya Asker-Zade: “Do you keep up your foreign language skills? If so, what mistakes do you make most often in German?”

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: No mistakes?

Vladimir Putin: Of course, I make mistakes; after all, it is not my native tongue. But the main problem is that I am gradually forgetting words. You see, language is like a musical instrument: you must practice every day to keep up a certain level. Regrettably, I do not have this opportunity now. And my vocabulary is gradually decreasing.

Nailya Asker-Zade: What about English?

Vladimir Putin: The same, only worse.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: “Mr President, which of your school teachers do you remember best?”

Vladimir Putin: Tamara Chizhova; I still remember her. She was my teacher from first to fourth grade. She was very kind. I remember her to this day. Vera Gurevich, my teacher from fifth to eighth grade. I still keep in touch with her.

Nailya Asker-Zade: “What was the best period in the history of our country?”

Vladimir Putin: There were many glorious periods in the history of Russia, even back before Peter the Great, who implemented major reforms, which changed the country. The reign of Catherine the Great was a period of our largest territorial acquisitions. And during the reign of Alexander I Russia became a superpower, as we say now. It is an obvious fact. Therefore, we can and must study all these eras and also many other periods. We must remember this, revere the memory of those who achieved these outstanding results, and try to measure up to their examples.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: “Mr President, who starches up your shirt collars and irons your shirts?” A question from Moscow.

Vladimir Putin: You see, there is a dry cleaners’ where I live, in Ogaryovo, and it really is…

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: …the best? By the way, this is paid promotion. (Laughter)

Vladimir Putin: I do not know how to describe it. But the people who work there, women… Thank you for this question. Why? Because you have given me an opportunity to thank them, express my gratitude to them. I see them very rarely, but I always admire the results of their work. I am not being ironic. When I put these shirts on, they look brand new to me, right off the shelf. Thank you very much. Of course, you must look your best, just like our moderators, at such events as we are having today, when millions of people are watching us.

Nailya Asker-zade: “Mr President, how do you cope with adversity?”

Vladimir Putin: Do you know what I am used to and how I feel about it? First, any adversity should be taken as something inevitable, because people in my position should operate on the premise that this is an absolutely natural part of what I do. Most importantly, one should believe in the correctness of the course that one is following. In that case, like an icebreaker, one can go through ice of any thickness, fully aware of what is going on around you, but not paying much attention to it and striving to achieve the goal that one has set for oneself.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: “Is your main achievement as President of Russia still ahead or already behind?”

Vladimir Putin: I hope it lies ahead.

Nailya Asker-zade: “You have quoted Mowgli and Twelve Chairs more than once. What are the three works of art that impressed you and influenced you the most?”

Vladimir Putin: Let us say it is Leo Tolstoy's War and Peace, Tchaikovsky's First Concerto for piano and orchestra, and Kolobok [Russian fairy tale].

Why? I want all my colleagues in high offices to pay attention to this story. Why? Because as soon as you, my dear colleagues, begin to take flattery for the truth and sink into this atmosphere under the influence of what they are telling you, you risk being eaten.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: “Mr. President, what does one need to be happy?”

Vladimir Putin: First … Right, I will try to be brief.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: No, this is a serious question, we still have time.

Nailya Asker-zade: This is a philosophical question.

Vladimir Putin: It is. I think that to be happy, you need to feel needed and to be able to fulfill your potential.

Nailya Asker-zade: “Where will you work after you retire?”

Vladimir Putin: Why work after retirement? I will sit near a woodstove and relax.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: ”How do you feel about diets?“

Vladimir Putin: Diets? You know, I have a rule of thumb – you can call it a diet, if you like: everything is good in moderation.

Nailya Asker-zade: Not only in eating.

“What games did you like to play when you were little?”

Vladimir Putin: I am tempted to say chess, but, unfortunately, it was not chess.

Nailya Asker-zade: The game, Cops and Robbers?

Vladimir Putin: Just like everyone else did, probably, in the then Leningrad backyards: hide-and-seek and tag.

Nailya Asker-zade: Here comes the last question: what kind of Russia do you dream about to pass on to the next generation?

Vladimir Putin: A question that I would like to answer with beautiful and colourful catchwords, and I do have them. But in this particular case I would like to give a more detailed answer, if I may. May I?

Nailya Asker-zade: Yes, of course, we still have time.

Vladimir Putin: You know, I will begin with something sad, namely, once upon a time our common homeland, the Soviet Union, disintegrated. The nucleus of that common state, of that historical Russia, namely the Russian Federation itself, is known to have lost almost half of its industrial potential, half of its economy – nearly 50 percent – approximately the same percentage of its population and a considerable part of its territory, a part that was important in the industrial and economic respects, a territory with a well-developed infrastructure, in which historical Russia had invested its resources not only for decades, but also for centuries.

And what has to be done about all this? I have already commented on that: it makes no sense to restore the Soviet Union. It is impossible and senseless for a number of reasons, and is also inexpedient, if we keep in mind, say, the demographic processes in certain republics of the former Soviet Union. Otherwise we may face insoluble social problems and even the erosion of the state-forming ethnic nucleus.

So, what should we do in Russia proper? How should we approach the geopolitical realities and domestic development? Look, despite the losses I have mentioned, Russia is still the biggest country in the world in terms of territory. And even though much of its territory lies in the northern latitudes, nevertheless, this is also important, keeping in mind the Northern Sea Route and much else. This is my first point.

Second, Russia is, without any doubt, a world treasure trove of various mineral resources, and this can and must be used cleverly. This too is a huge competitive advantage for us.

But our chief gold reserve is not even the $600-odd billion that has been accumulated by our Gobsecks at the Central Bank and the Finance Ministry. Russia’s chief gold reserve is its people. This is not mere rhetoric, nor a statement intended to ingratiate myself with others. I am sincerely convinced that this is really so.

After all, our people, the multiethnic population of Russia, are, firstly, highly spiritual and possess deep historical and cultural roots. This is always important, but in the modern world – I will explain why right away – this is important doubly and triply so. This is emerging as some almost tangible and even economic substance. And the following is the reason why. The world of today is based on high technologies that constitute the future of the entire world, including this country. If so, this deep-down principle, the innate spirituality of the Russians and other ethnic groups of the Russian Federation is highly important because at heart we nurture a considerable respectful attitude towards science and education. This has to do with our culture.

Today, 60 percent of parents in our country would like their children to take up science, even though you cannot earn as much in this sphere as in business, but they nevertheless want their children to become scientists. It is very telling.

The future of humankind is connected with this: with genetics, biology in the broad sense of the word, information technology, artificial intelligence and everything else at the junction of these disciplines. And we have huge competitive advantages there. If we ensure internal stability, which external forces have always been trying to disrupt, if we attain this internal stability our success will be inevitable. And we will be able to say proudly and with good reason that we live in a state that is domestically an attractive place to live in, and we will have reason to say that we live in a country which we consider great. In my opinion, this is very important. This inner feeling of our citizens and inner attitude to Russia is important and, in itself, is a vital guarantee that Russia will definitely attain all the goals it sets for itself.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Mr President, thank you very much for this long and substantive conversation.

Nailya Asker-Zade: Let us believe that this is how it will be in our country.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: I would like to thank our colleagues, Natalya Yuryeva and Tatyana Remezova, who worked with the volunteers. Our special thanks go to the volunteers, who received a huge number of questions. We would not have succeeded without you.

Vladimir Putin: For my part, I would like to thank our listeners and viewers, and the participants of our discussion and meeting today.

I would like to assure you once again and say what I said at the beginning: we will try to make sure that not a single question goes unnoticed, even if we could not discuss it during this conversation.

I would like once again to thank the moderators for their coordinated work today. Thank you.

Yekaterina Berezovskaya: Thank you.

Nailya Asker-Zade: Thank you.

Vladimir Putin: Thank you very much.



////



Presidential Address to the Federal Assembly
Event_Date: 21/4/2021
Event_Time: 13:20
Event_Place: Moscow

Members of the Federation Council, State Duma deputies,

Citizens of Russia,

Today’s Presidential Address to the Federal Assembly will be dedicated mostly to internal issues. These include, naturally, healthcare, social policy and the economy. Of course, I will say a few words about external affairs and literally a few words about security issues.

It stands to reason that I will begin with last year’s events, when our country and, actually, the entire world faced a new, previously unknown and extremely dangerous infection.

It that period, including during our meetings with experts and conversations with the leaders of many states, I often heard the following description of the situation: we are faced with total uncertainty. And this is how it really was.

I could see this from the information I received from the regions. The number of people who contracted the disease and needed to be rushed to hospital kept growing. Actually, all of you are very well aware of this. Many hospitals were filled to capacity and reported that they could run out of oxygen soon, including in intensive care units. Ventilators, protective masks and PPE were actually distributed by the piece. Shops were running out of basic products, such as cereals, butter and sugar, due to increased demand.

The epidemic was on the offensive. But although there was great concern, I personally had no doubt that we would pull through.

Citizens, society and the state acted responsibly and in unison. We rallied, managed to take preventive action, to create conditions that would reduce the risk of infection, and to provide medical personnel and citizens with personal protective equipment. We increased the number of hospital beds for coronavirus patients more than five times over, to 280,000 beds.

The brief outline of measures conceals the tremendous and intensive work of millions of people in all regions of the Russian Federation. I would like to cordially thank all of you for this. Everyone worked quickly, efficiently and conscientiously.

At that time and later on, we were analysing the situation practically non-stop. I recall vividly my visit to the hospital in Kommunarka. It was necessary to experience, to see at first hand the danger facing us and to assess the working conditions of medical specialists. They immediately found themselves in the thick of events and fought for every life, while risking their own.

Today, doctors, paramedics, medical nurses and members of ambulance teams are sitting here in this hall. Once again my heartfelt thanks to you and your colleagues from all the Russian regions.

Russian researchers made a real breakthrough, and Russia now has three reliable coronavirus vaccines. These and many other achievements of the past few years highlight the country’s growing science and technological potential.

I would like to thank everyone, every person who contributed to the fight against infection, including the workers at the plants manufacturing medications, medical equipment, personal protective equipment, and enterprises working 24 hours a day, housing and utility agencies, trade companies, the Russian business community that quickly converted entire sectors so that they could manufacture essential goods, civilian and military builders, agriculture workers who gathered a record-breaking harvest, one of the biggest in the country’s history, that is, over 130 million tonnes.

The personnel of law enforcement agencies and the special services continued to carry out their duty, and the Russian Armed Forces reliably ensured our country’s security.

I would like to underscore the selfless behaviour of people working for social services, orphanages, boarding schools, retirement homes and hospices who stayed and who continue to stay with their charges. You will certainly agree with me that, while analysing developments at these institutions, one feels proud of people who are carrying out their duty there in such a responsible manner. It could move you to tears. I would like to thank them once again.

I would also like to convey my sincere gratitude to school teachers and the lecturers at universities and other education institutions. You did everything possible to enable your students and pupils to gain knowledge and successfully pass their exams, with the involvement and support of their parents.

Russia’s cultural life continued unabated. Theatres, museums and concert halls remained open to audiences online thanks to modern technology. Everyone who works in this crucial sphere rose to the occasion.

Our people showed discipline and managed to observe, let’s face it, quite exhausting, but vital precautions. Thus, acting together, we have put up an effective barrier to the pandemic.

The people’s solidarity showed in concrete actions, in caring for the loved ones and in willingness to help people in need. Millions became volunteers and engaged in building person-to-person help routes. The nationwide We Are Together campaign brought together people from different walks of life and ages. As always during challenging times, our traditional religions stepped up to provide spiritual support to the society. I see the leaders of our religions here and I would like to bow deeply to you, thank you very much

Throughout history, our people have come out victorious and overcome trials thanks to unity. Today, family, friendship, mutual assistance, graciousness and unity have come to the fore as well.

Spiritual and moral values, which are already being forgotten in some countries, have, on the contrary, made us stronger. And we will always uphold and defend these values.

Colleagues,

The pandemic broke out at a time when the aftermath of the demographic shocks of the 1940s and 1990s converged. We realise that the current demographic situation is an emergency. Unfortunately, this is how things are. We must accept and admit it and do something about it based on our understanding of this situation.

Saving the people of Russia is our top national priority. This priority underlies the stipulations of the updated Constitution concerning the protection of the family, the important role parents play in bringing up their children, strengthening social guarantees, and further developing the economy, education and culture.

Our strategy is to return to sustainable population growth to make sure that the average life expectancy in Russia increases to 78 years in 2030.

Unfortunately, the statistics show us sad and disappointing numbers. We are even seeing a certain decline. It is clear what is happening because of the pandemic, but we will keep our strategic goals in this critical sphere unchanged.

I fully realise that this is no small feat, the more so as the coronavirus has not yet been completely defeated and remains a direct threat. We see the dramatic developments in many countries where the cases of infection continue to grow. We need to keep in check the defence barriers designed to slow down the spread of the virus along our external borders and within our country.

I would like to address all citizens of Russia once again. Friends, please stay alert. I am asking you to take care of yourselves and your loved ones and to comply with the doctors’ and sanitary services’ recommendations as closely as possible.

Vaccination is of crucial importance. I would like to ask the Government, the Healthcare Ministry and the heads of the regions to monitor this process on a daily basis. The opportunity to take the jab must be available everywhere, so that we achieve the so-called herd immunity by the autumn.

The attainment of this goal depends on everyone, on all our citizens. Please, I am asking all citizens of Russia once again to get vaccinated. This is the only way to stop this deadly epidemic. There is no alternative. The other choice is much worse: to contract the disease with unpredictable consequences.

I would like to say once again that the disease is still with us. But we must start thinking already now about healing the wounds it has inflicted and restoring people’s health.

During the peak periods, our hospitals and outpatient clinics had to reduce or even suspend scheduled visits. This increased the risk of the aggravation of chronic illnesses or the risk of missing the first signs of or correctly diagnosing new illnesses.

I would like to ask the Government, the Healthcare Ministry and the constituent entities of the Russian Federation to expand the system of medical check-ups and periodic screenings, taking into account the current epidemiological situation, and to relaunch them in full measure on July 1, 2021 for people of all ages. They must involve the largest number of people possible. This is why we will increase the supply of mobile medical diagnostic systems to the regions in the near future.

One of the targets of the coronavirus is the cardiovascular system. These diseases have always been the leading cause of death. Therefore, special attention during periodic screenings must be given to people with cardiovascular diseases. I would like to instruct the Government to take additional measures to prevent the diseases that are the main causes of premature death. As I have already mentioned, these are cardiovascular diseases plus malignant tumours and respiratory system diseases.

Hepatitis C claims many young lives. Decisions must be made to reduce this threat to the health of the nation to a minimum within 10 years.

To ensure that as many people as possible can restore their health at sanatoriums and health resorts, I propose that the 20 percent rebate programme for domestic travel is extended at least until the end of the year.

Children’s health is our special priority. Indeed, the foundation for good health for many years to come is laid during childhood. Children's rest and recreation activities must be made as affordable as possible. In this regard, this year, I propose reimbursing half of what parents spend on their children’s summer camps.

In addition, we need to expand opportunities for student tourism. Already this year, we must launch several pilot projects, including accommodation on university campuses and in dormitories in other regions for students who travel around the country during the summer.

And, of course, we must reward the young people who have done well in academic competitions and in volunteer and creative initiatives as well as the projects operated by the Russia – Land of Opportunity platform. For them, the partial reimbursement programme for tourist vouchers will remain valid during the holidays, aka the high season. This is a ground-breaking decision.

I wish to thank all the parliamentary groups which supported the decision on the taxation of high incomes, or rather, a portion of high incomes. These proceeds will go to the dedicated Circle of Kindness fund and have already been released to help children affected by rare and serious diseases, to purchase expensive medicines and medical equipment, and to cover the costs of surgeries.

On April 28, we will celebrate Ambulance Worker Day which was established as a show of respect to those who arrive first to save lives. These specialists must be provided with all necessary supplies. Within the next three years, we will make another 5,000 new ambulances available to rural communities, urban-type localities and small towns, which will replace the ambulance fleet almost in full.

I want to emphasise that public healthcare authorities in many leading countries – we are well aware of it and, in fact, they themselves are saying so – were unable to deal with the challenges of the pandemic as effectively as we did in Russia. At the same time, global health care is on the cusp of a genuine revolution. This must be recognised and clearly seen. We cannot miss it.

The pandemic has exponentially sped up the introduction of telemedicine, artificial intelligence and new approaches in diagnostics, surgery, rehabilitation and the production of medicines everywhere. We must put these technologies at the service of the people of our country.

We must build our healthcare system around this ground-breaking technology, and keep an eye on pressing everyday problems in the process. As we are all aware, they abound, mostly in primary care. There must be no such thing as waiting lines, no hassle making a diagnostics appointment or a specialist doctor appointment, or obtaining prescriptions and sick leaves, for that matter. This has often come up in our discussions lately. The funds have been set side and allocated. It is time to move quickly and efficiently to make it happen.

We have a backlog to deal with in healthcare and other social sectors, including many technical, financial and managerial challenges. However, what people need is qualified and timely medical help. I propose reviewing public healthcare problems from this perspective at an expanded meeting of the State Council some time soon. We will prepare for it and hold it shortly.

I repeat: we have gained some fundamentally new experience in fulfilling our social commitments. During the pandemic, we made direct payments to families bringing up almost 28 million children, and they received their benefits without any unnecessary paperwork or other kinds of red tape – they got the money they needed and were entitled to automatically. I know Government members have been working on this, focusing deliberately, not without some failures, but they have made every effort to accomplish this task, and coped with it. This is great, this is a good example. This approach should become the norm at all levels of government.

This is the essence of the National Social Initiative, which was discussed at a recent joint meeting of the State Council Presidium and the Agency for Strategic Initiatives.

I am calling on the regional governors: it is your direct responsibility to organise the work of local clinics, daycare nurseries and schools, and employment centres, based on the daily needs of families, of each and every person. In many regions, I have seen with my own eyes that such work has already been launched in certain areas. This needs to be done everywhere and in all social sectors.

As soon as in 2022, we must introduce the ‘social treasury’ principles. This means that all federal benefits, pensions and other social payments and services will be provided and paid in a one-stop mode, without having to visit dozens of different agencies, but simply upon marriage, the birth of a child, retirement or other life milestones. Within three years, the vast majority of public and municipal services should be provided to Russian citizens remotely, 24 hours a day, seven days a week, that is, on an ongoing basis.

Separately, we will have to discuss child-support payments, which are a sensitive topic for many families. Unfortunately, this is a problem in our country. This procedure should not be humiliating for anyone. Most issues here need to be resolved remotely and, most importantly, in the interests of the affected party. A mother with a child should not have to camp on the doorstep of various authorities to collect official documents, carrying her baby in her arms, and this is what usually happens. A system of interagency communication needs to be built, with banks included, in such a way as to ensure the unconditional execution of court decisions on the recovery of child-support payments. The state is obliged to protect the rights of the child; this is what we are talking about. I will return to this topic again later.

Colleagues,

We understand the heavy toll that the pandemic has taken on people’s welfare. Statistics show the aggravating effects of this outbreak on social inequality and poverty. It has been a challenge for all countries around the world – remember, all countries, not only Russia, are experiencing the same consequences. Certainly, we should be primarily concerned about the situation in our own country.

We are now facing price hikes that are undercutting people’s incomes. Some urgent decisions have been made, of course, but we cannot solely rely on targeted and essentially directive measures. We remember potential outcomes. Back in the late 1980s and the 1990s in the Soviet Union, they resulted in empty store shelves. But today, even when the pandemic was at its worst, we did not allow the same thing to happen.

The Government’s goal is to create conditions that will be long-term and which, I want to stress this part, colleagues, can, thanks to market mechanisms (which we have), guarantee the predictability of prices and quality replenishment of the domestic market. Nobody is saying that we will be setting prices from the top. There’s no need to muddy the waters and scare people. There are market regulatory mechanisms and they must be employed – promptly and to the extent required and appropriate to a specific situation in the economy and social sphere. We need to stimulate investment activity by reducing business risks. The two are not mutually exclusive.

Surely, the main goal right now is to ensure that people’s real incomes grow – that is, to restore them and secure their further growth. As I said, we need tangible changes in our fight against poverty.

Before anything else, the Government must provide direct support to families with children who are experiencing hardships. This has been our consistent policy and we will continue to pursue it.

We already have a system of benefits paid to parents of one or two children from the time the children are born and until they reach the age of three. Families with incomes below two subsistence minimums per family member are entitled to such benefits. The average monthly amount paid across the country is 11,300 rubles per child. Seventy-eight Russian regions pay benefits for the third child, also 11,300 rubles on average.

Please note that we are making consistent progress in this area, step by step. Last year, we introduced benefits for children aged three to seven. They range from 5,650 to 11,300 rubles per month depending on the region.

I instruct the Government to develop, by July 1, a comprehensive system of support for families with children. Our goal is to minimise the risk of poverty for such families.

But a number of new decisions need to be taken immediately, already today. It is always difficult for a single parent to raise a child. There are plenty of reasons for that. And this is not about the reasons but about supporting children. It is particularly difficult when a single-parent family is having financial problems, especially when children start going to school and family expenses objectively rise.

In particular, we must support single-parent families, where a mother or a father is bringing up a child alone, and only one of the parents is registered on the birth certificate – sorry to be speaking of such mundane things, but this is a fact of life – or the parents have divorced and one of them has the right to child-support payments. Therefore, as of July 1 this year, all children in such families aged between 8 and 16, inclusively, will receive a benefit. The national average of such benefit will be 5,650 rubles.

Of course, we must also help women who are expecting a baby and who have financial problems. It is extremely important for a mother-to-be to get support from the state and society, so that they can keep their pregnancy and know that they will receive help in raising and bringing up their child.

I propose approving a monthly subsidy for women who register at a maternity centre during early pregnancy and who have financial problems. The average subsidy for them will be 6,350 rubles a month.

Next, the sick pay for taking care of a child who falls ill depends on the employment record, which is correct, on the whole, and fair. However, young women receive much smaller sick leave payments. We have discussed this issue at the State Council, and it has been raised by the United Russia. We need to adopt legal decisions on this matter without delay, so that payments for taking care of a sick child aged up to 7 years inclusively are approved at 100 percent of the parent’s salary as soon as this year.

You understand what this means. The majority of those in this room know that the longer the employment record the larger the sick pay. Women who have a long work record usually receive full sick pay, but they usually do not have children at their age. Those who have children do not receive full pay. We must definitely help those who are expecting a baby.

I would also like to remind you that we have expanded and extended the maternity capital programme up until 2026. This benefit will now be paid already for the first child. We could not afford this before. The maternity capital has been adjusted to inflation and is almost 640,000 rubles

Free hot meals for all primary school children were approved as of January 1, 2020, and this measure has become a great help for families.

I would like to point out that all our decisions were designed to support our people. I know that many and very many people have financial problems now. The labour market and real disposable income of the people will be certainly restored, and we will move on. This has not happened yet. Therefore, I suggest approving one more one-off payment for the families that have school children, namely, 10,000 rubles per schoolchild. Moreover, this payment will also be made for the children who will only start school this year. We will transfer the money in mid-August, so that parents can get their children ready for school.

The updated Constitution of Russia includes clauses on demographic development, and protection of the family and childhood. They should be implemented in practice at all levels of government. I propose including a section aimed at supporting young people in each national project.

Friends,

During the pandemic, many young doctors and nurses, recent graduates as well as residents and students of medical universities worked courageously in the so-called red zones, joining their senior colleagues. In that extraordinary situation, teachers, schoolchildren, college and university students continued to teach and study, to have exams. Young family members supported their parents and older relatives. The youth of Russia proved to be extremely worthy during that period of trials. We can be proud of them.

We will do everything to open up as many life opportunities as possible for the younger generation. Their journey certainly begins at school, and I am sure that school will always be a second home for children; a new home, comfortable and modern.

Under the existing federal programme and with additional resources provided by the VEB Development Bank, we will build at least 1,300 new schools for more than a million children by the end of 2024. We will also purchase at least 16,000 school buses over the next four years. All school buses must be modern and safe.

Classroom teachers have been receiving a monthly addition to their salaries since last year. A very necessary and, I am sure, fair decision. I remember how we held discussions on this matter last year.

However, I have received requests, letters from teachers in secondary vocational institutions who say they have been forgotten. This is actually true. Justice must be restored. We have to fix this and establish the same additional payment of 5,000 rubles for supervisors of educational groups at technical schools and colleges.

I propose allocating an additional 10 billion rubles in the next two years for major repairs and technical equipment of our pedagogical universities. I ask the Government to pay close attention to up-to-date training of future teachers. The future of Russia largely depends on them.

Furthermore, school teaching teams should be expanded with teaching assistants, mentors and counsellors, whose job will be to organise exciting projects for children at schools.

It is very important that our young people should look to and be inspired by the achievements and victories of our outstanding ancestors and contemporaries, by their love for our Motherland and aspiration to make a personal contribution to its development. Children should have the opportunity to explore the national history and the multinational culture, our achievements in science and technology, literature and art in advanced formats. You know, I still open certain school textbooks occasionally and am surprised at what I see there – as if what is written there has nothing to do with us at all. Who writes such textbooks? Who approves them? It is unbelievable. They mention everything, the ‘second front’ and a lot of other facts, but not the Battle of Stalingrad – how is that possible? Amazing! I do not even want to comment.

I propose allocating an additional 24 billion rubles within the next three years to renovate cultural centres, libraries and museums in rural areas and small historical towns. This is another crucial area.

It is important to resume the activities of the Knowledge Society – we all remember well what it is – based on a modern digital platform. It seems to have been operational lately, but no one seems to notice it is there, either. Also, in order to support projects in culture, art and creative activities, we will set up a Presidential fund for cultural initiatives. Already this year, we will use its competitive grants to finance over 1,500 creative teams.

Colleagues,

A month from now, 11th grade students will be taking exams. Based on the results, most of them, about 60 percent, will enrol in universities and have their tuition covered from the budget. It can be safely stated that practically no country in the world apart from Russia has this kind of broad and free access to higher education.

In the next two years, we will make an additional 45,000 state-funded places available at our universities. At least 70 percent of them will go to the regions which need university graduates.

Starting this year, at least 100 universities in the constituent entities of our Federation will receive grants in the amount of 100 million rubles or more for opening student technoparks and business incubators, upgrading academic and laboratory facilities, and running training programmes. All state universities will be eligible for this support, including the ones that train future teachers, medical doctors, transport and culture workers. I am confident that the young generation of Russians, Russian scientists, will make their names known in the meaningful research projects that are yet to come.

This year was declared Science and Technology Year in our country. We realise that science is absolutely key in the modern world. Until 2024, Russia will allocate 1.63 trillion rubles from the federal budget alone for civil, including fundamental, research. But that is not all.

We are about to launch ground-breaking programmes in areas that are critical to our country. They will be given the status of nationwide projects. I would like to discuss some of them separately just to give you a sense.

First, we must have a solid and reliable shield to give us sanitary and biological safety. We now understand what it is about. It is imperative to ensure Russia’s independence in the production of the entire range of vaccines and pharmaceutical substances, including medications against infections that are resistant to the current generation of antibiotics. Importantly, this must be achieved with the maximum engagement of Russian-made equipment and domestic components.

In the event of an infection as dangerous as the coronavirus, or, God forbid, even more dangerous, Russia must be prepared to develop its own test systems within four days, precisely four days, and to create an efficacious domestic vaccine and start its mass production as soon as possible. These are the goals that we are setting for ourselves. The timeframe for achieving these goals is 2030. But the sooner we get there, the better.

Second, we need new comprehensive approaches to the development of our energy sector, including new solutions for nuclear generation in the promising areas of hydrogen energy and energy storage.

Third, we must find answers to the climate change challenges, adjust our agriculture, industry, the housing and utilities sector and the entire infrastructure to them, create a carbon utilisation sector, bring down emissions and introduce strict control and monitoring measures.

Over the next 30 years, the cumulative emissions in Russia must be smaller than in the EU. It is an ambitious goal, considering the size of our country and the specific features of its geography, climate and economic structure. However, I have no doubt whatsoever that it is a perfectly realistic goal in light of our research and technological potential.

Our new energy and pharmaceutical sectors and the solution of climate problems must provide a powerful boost to a comprehensive modernisation of all economic sectors and the social sphere. It is a direct path to the creation of modern and well-paid jobs.

The efforts taken by each level of government, business, development institutions and the Russian Academy of Sciences must have in view the main, central task: to improve the quality of life for our people. I would like to point out that our position on environmental protection is a matter of principle in this respect, and it will definitely remain unchanged.

The dangers of the alternative position have been recently exemplified by the events in Norilsk, Usolye-Sibirskoye and several other places. We will certainly help the people who live there, but we must also preclude a repetition of such environmental disasters.

I would like to ask those responsible to accelerate the adoption of a law on the financial responsibility of enterprise owners for clearing up the accumulated pollution and for the reclamation of industrial sites. This is a very simple approach. Here it is: if you have benefited from polluting the environment, clean up after yourself. We must act harshly. Rosprirodnadoz [the Federal Service for Supervision of Natural Resources] and other regulatory authorities must do their jobs.

I would like to add that the “polluter pays” principle must also be employed in full in the waste disposal sector to ensure transition to the so-called closed-loop economy. With this aim in view, we must launch a mechanism of extended producers and importers’ responsibility for the management of products and packaging wastes as soon as this year.

I also propose marking environmental payments to the federal budget. I know that experts and financial specialists do not like such special marks, but I see this as a vital sphere of our activity. We can make an exception in this case, and invest these funds in clearing up accumulated pollution and improving the environment.

Also, as I said, the amount of hazardous emissions in Russia’s 12 largest industrial centres must be reduced by 20 percent by 2024. We have already discussed this. Obviously, this goal must be accomplished through a comprehensive modernisation of the industrial sector, the housing and utilities sector, transport and energy.

Moreover, I propose expanding the emission quota system to all Russian cities with major air quality problems and introduce strict liability for non-compliance with environmental regulations. Of course, this requires transparent monitoring.

We will definitely support the efforts of businesses to upgrade their facilities up to current environmental standards. For example, upgrading will begin this year at aluminium plants in Bratsk, Irkutsk, Krasnoyarsk and Novokuznetsk based on the state guarantee mechanism. I will later name other cities and towns in other contexts but it does not mean that our work is limited to those areas. They only serve as examples.

Colleagues,

Last year, we allocated unprecedented resources for supporting the economy. Among other things, we managed to preserve over 5 million jobs through subsidised loans for wage payments. I want to stress that this programme succeeded but it succeeded precisely because businesses acted responsibly and did everything they could to keep their employees. We could see that.

Unfortunately, it was not possible to prevent layoffs completely. I understand how hard it is for those who lost their jobs. The Government was instructed to ensure that the labour market recovers by the end of the year. Still, this problem must be solved sooner so that people can have a stable income again. The Government will be encouraging entrepreneurial initiatives and stimulate private investments that create new jobs.

As you know, last year, social insurance contributions for small and medium-sized businesses were reduced by half, from 30 to 15 percent. This decision will remain in force permanently and is not subject to review.

I instruct the Government to present, within the next month, additional proposals on supporting small and medium-sized businesses, such as tax incentives, accessible loans and expanding product distribution and sales, including to major state-run companies.

As for other decisions in the economic sphere, I would like to mention the following.

First, we have already scrapped many archaic norms and requirements in construction and other fields and discontinued many unnecessary control inspections, but we also need to increase the momentum to achieve substantive, clear and tangible results in improving the business climate. For example, building a turnkey factory in Russia should be faster, more economically efficient and easier than in other regions of the world, including countries with developed economies.

Furthermore, we need to simplify the working conditions for non-commodity exporters. We have certainly been pursuing this policy line for a few years now, but we still need to remove all excessive restrictions in forex control for these exporters. This is one of the problems. The new procedure should start functioning in July. We have discussed this matter more than once. All amendments to the legislation must be adopted as quickly as possible during the spring session.

Secondly, the talent of an entrepreneur is primarily the talent of a creator, an aspiration to change life for the better, to create new jobs. The state will definitely support this attitude.

In the modern world where the market situation sometimes changes almost every day, businesses have to deal with high risks, especially when investing in long-term projects. To address this, we will be adjusting the entire private investment support system. We will evaluate how effective the projects are by the new products, services, and technologies they provide people with and how they improve the potential of Russia and each individual region.

The Special Investment Contract mechanism has already been improved; we have implemented a new instrument – Investment Protection and Promotion Agreements. We have consolidated development institutions on the basis of VEB. Their job is to reduce the risks for investing private capital, to help in the creation of new markets and investment mechanisms, the same as with the Project Finance Factory mechanism already in place. It is currently supporting more than 40 commercial projects with a total investment of 3 trillion rubles.

I am waiting for proposals from the Government on the implementation of the ideas proposed in March at a meeting with Russian businesses. Colleagues, you are well aware of this.

Third, we are making all major decisions concerning the economy through a dialogue with the business community. This is the practice established over many years. Of course, we have the right to expect that the auxiliary financial instruments and support mechanisms will bring the most desired result, which is converting profit into investment and development.

There is an important thing I want to say although it is nothing new to businesses. They know it already. The corporate sector is expected to make a record profit this year, despite all the problems that we are dealing with. Despite these problems, this is the real picture. We will take note of how this profit will be used and, based on the annual results, we may decide to calibrate the tax legislation. I want to see specific proposals from the Government. Off the record, I should note: some withdraw dividends while others invest in the development of their companies and entire industries. We will be encouraging those who invest.

Last year, we substantially increased budget expenditure while managing to maintain the stability of state finances. The Government and the Central Bank must continue to pursue a responsible financial policy. Ensuring macroeconomic stability and containing inflation within set parameters is an extremely important task. I assume that it will definitely be accomplished.

At the same time, thanks to our budget capacity and our reserves, we can allocate more funds to support investment in infrastructure and provide regions with new development instruments. Launching these instruments will require the law to be amended. I expect that all parliamentary parties – A Just Russia, the Liberal Democratic Party, the Communist Party and United Russia – will uphold these amendments.

In this regard, I want to thank all constructive public forces in the country for their responsible and patriotic attitude during this difficult epidemic. These are not just meaningless words because it was this attitude and its practical significance that helped all of us preserve the balance and stability of Russia’s government and political system. This is always important but it is especially relevant because we are preparing for the elections to the State Duma and other government bodies, considering the extensive work we will have to carry out. I hope that this competitive mindset that unites us in the face of common goals will persist.

Colleagues,

The country is developing and moving forward, but this is only taking place when the regions of the Russian Federation are developing. A striving of the heads of constituent entities to make their regions successful and self-sufficient must be and will be encouraged in every way.

We will support those who assume responsibility and launch constructive projects. I am confident that every Russian region has huge potential. To help make positive and productive use of this potential, what must we reduce first of all? The governors know what I am referring to: we must reduce the debt burden. These topics must be thoroughly discussed once again.

I ask the Government to submit by June 1 the proposals on ensuring long-term stability of regional and municipal finance and on increasing the regions’ self-sufficiency. We will discuss them in summer at a State Council meeting, and we will do so with due regard for the priority decisions about which I will tell you now.

First of all, we must help regions with large commercial debts. Here is what I suggest: the amount of a region’s commercial debt that exceeds 25 percent of the given region’s own revenues will be replaced with budgetary loans that will mature in 2029.

In addition, I propose restructuring the budgetary loans, yes, budgetary loans that were issued to the regions last year for taking measures to combat the pandemic. I believe that this would be fair. I would like to remind everyone that these loans will mature in two months, on July 1. I suggest extending them to 2029 as well.

I would like to emphasise that the restructuring of accumulated debts should be used as a mechanism of increasing the self-sufficiency of regional economies, especially considering that we will be offering a fundamentally new development tool to our constituent entities. I am referring to the so-called budgetary infrastructure loans with an interest rate of not more than 3 percent per annum and with maturity in 15 years. We intend to allocate a total of at least 0.5 trillion rubles, that is, 500 billion rubles of such infrastructure loans by the end of 2023.

Regional debt restructuring must be based on the concept of justice, which has always been the case, actually. Some constituent entities have large accumulated commercial debts, while other entities did not take out many loans. The latter may feel neglected in this case. This will not do, and we will not permit this. We will support those who have always pursued and continue to pursue a balanced financial policy. The principle of the distribution of infrastructure loans will be as follows: the fewer debts a region had, the more it will be able to receive in infrastructure loans.

We are one country. All levels of government and business must work to one end. Debt restructuring and an innovative investment resource in the form of infrastructure loans will allow us to expand the planning horizon and to launch new solutions that are tied in with the implementation of national projects, sector-specific strategies and a comprehensive plan for upgrading the backbone infrastructure.

Federal infrastructure loans are a powerful resource, but whether they will help us get ahead or attract private investment hugely depends on what regional management teams do and on their ability to conduct an open and candid dialogue with businesses, investors, and, of course, primarily, individuals.

The infrastructure projects in the regions must be implemented, primarily, in the interests of the people, and serve as investment in the creation of new jobs and in promoting the well-being of millions of Russian households and securing the future of our children. The priorities will be building motorways and bypasses in urban areas, upgrading the housing and utilities sector infrastructure and the public transport system, as well as conducting integrated development of territories and building tourist facilities.

Please note that the infrastructure and budget loans will be fully under the control of the Federal Treasury and will be provided exclusively for specific projects that have been thoroughly analysed by experts at the federal level. While we are at it, I would like to say something to regional leaders and the Government: listen, let's work in a rhythmic and business-like manner. I do not want to use harsh or rude language at this rostrum, but things must be done on time and projects must be prepared, not just pictures shown to the Government. In turn, the Government must quickly process the projects and help the regions deal with things they have problems dealing with. You must help your colleagues, you understand that? Not trash what they have brought to you and say they did a bad job. Some of them are unable to do what you ask of them. Help them, and then things will be on the path forwards.

The scale of the projects may vary, but most importantly, as I said, they must benefit our people and open up new opportunities. For example, in conjunction with our major companies and using the proposed mechanism, the Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Area will begin the construction of the Northern Latitudinal Railway. This is the railway that will spur the development of the richest resources of the Arctic. This project has been in the works for a long time now, and it's time to launch it, since we can do so now. For example, as a result, Nizhny Novgorod will be able to continue building the metro and to start renovating the city centre. Chelyabinsk, another city with a million-plus residents, will also have the opportunity to upgrade its transport system through a long-standing metro construction project. I am aware of other similar projects in Krasnoyarsk and other regions.

And, of course, the construction of new facilities must be at a qualitatively higher level. I want the Government to draft a clear step-by-step plan for the end-to-end and widespread use of digital design, and the production and introduction of cutting-edge energy-efficient materials. This is also important if we want to tackle the climate and environmental challenges.

Large-scale infrastructure development sets fundamentally new tasks before the construction industry. In the difficult past year, it worked smoothly and built over 80 million square metres of housing. This is a good result. The more we build, the more affordable housing will there be for Russian families.

Therefore, we have an ambitious goal. We have already discussed it as well and this ambitious goal has not disappeared– we plan to build 120 million square metres of housing every year. That said, we must certainly envisage a special mechanism for supporting private housing construction.

As for large-scale construction, the DOM.RF development institute will attract financial resources through the placement of bonds. This is a tried and tested mechanism that generally works well. These resources must go to developers as targeted loans.

I would like to emphasise that federal budget subsidies will allow DOM.RF to issue loans to developers at a minimal annual rate of about 3–4 percent. The construction of residential neighbourhoods in Tula, Tyumen, the Sakhalin Region and Kuzbass will be pilot projects for developing this model.

Improvement of cities and towns and housing construction growth play a major role in the development of the regions. We must take care of the urgent, daily problems of local residents. Quite a few Russian families live in areas connected to gas networks but their homes still have no access to gas for some reason. It seems the pipe is there but there is no gas at home.

I would like to ask the Government to work out, in cooperation with the regions, a clear-cut plan for bringing gas to such households. In this context, I support United Russia’s initiative, notably, that people do not have to pay for laying gas pipes directly to the border of their land plots in a residential area.

As I have already said, the Government must analyse all details in cooperation with Gazprom and other companies and agencies that work in this area to prevent any setbacks. Otherwise, I will say something from this rostrum and people will be waiting for it but because you don’t put some squiggles or commas in the right place everything will get bogged down again. This is unacceptable, and I will check on it myself, so please pay attention. Mosoblgaz and other companies must understand what they must do, in what timeframe and how much money they have at their disposal.

The goal is certainly more extensive. We must offer every region our solutions on public access to reliable and clean energy sources. This may be electricity, including from renewable sources, or environmentally friendly use of coal, which is also an option in the modern world, pipeline or liquefied gas. I instruct the regional heads to prepare, in coordination with the Government, detailed plans of action and start implementing them next year.

For example, in Kamchatka we must envisage the creation of local gas-receiving infrastructure to ensure reliable long-term gas supplies to the residents and companies of the Kamchatka Territory.

Colleagues,

We will not only give fundamentally new development tools to the regions, but will also directly invest federal resources into the settlement of the worst systemic problems, which will have a compound effect on boosting the regions’ growth and improving the quality of people’s lives.

We will begin with allocations from the National Welfare Fund for building mainline motorways. First of all, we should finance the ongoing construction of the Moscow-Kazan high-speed road and, more than that, extend it all the way to Yekaterinburg, completing this project within three years.

This way, together with the existing Moscow-St Petersburg high-speed road and the Central Ring Road, this will ensure safe high-speed motorway transit across the entire European part of Russia, from the Baltic Sea to the Urals, by 2024.

However, it is not enough to simply connect the end-of-line destinations. What good will this do, if it does not change anything about life in villages or small towns but only gives the people there an opportunity to watch high-speed trains and vehicles rush past? The backbone infrastructure must definitely lead to the development of all the territories where it has been built, giving rise to the development of a modern regional network.

The constituent entities will now be able to use infrastructure loans to speed up the implementation of these construction projects. But in their development plans, our colleagues should remember and take into account that the federal and regional mainlines must function as a unified system in the interests of our citizens, businesses and regions. In this way, the infrastructure loans and the resources of the National Welfare Fund will be working for the benefit of all Russian regions.

The same goes for our new national project in the tourist sphere. A programme of easy loans will be launched soon to finance the construction and renovation of hotels and other tourist infrastructure. The interest rate on these loans will be 3–5 percent as well, and the loans will mature in 15 years.

There are many other pilot projects. I will only mention some of them: the development of Sheregesh, the leading mountain ski resort in Kuzbass; the creation of a yachting resort in the Bay of Balaklava in Sevastopol; and the development of the tourist industry on the Altai and in the Kaliningrad Region.

The infrastructure loans project will give a new impetus to entire tourist clusters. In particular, several regions in Central Russia will be able to modernise and expand the Golden Ring route at a fundamentally new level, realising the tourist potential of small towns such as Tarusa, Palekh, Murom, Gorokhovets, Tutayev and Borovsk. Development projects will be launched in the Volga Region cities, the Crimean resorts, the Black Sea and Pacific coast areas, as well as in our resort towns such as Staraya Russa in the Novgorod Region and Kavkazskiye Mineralnye Vody in the Caucasus, including its gem, Kislovodsk.

Russia is a hospitable country that is open to its good friends. You surely remember what happened during the 2018 football championships. As soon as the epidemiological situation allows, we will lift the remaining restrictions and millions of tourists from all over the world will come to Russia again. We have a practical task at hand: to ensure that e-visas for travel to Russia are available remotely and without undue formalities within a matter of four days in the majority of countries.

Colleagues,

The meaning and purpose of Russia's policy in the international arena – I will just say a few words about this to conclude my address – is to ensure peace and security for the well-being of our citizens, for the stable development of our country. Russia certainly has its own interests we defend and will continue to defend within the framework of international law, as all other states do. And if someone refuses to understand this obvious thing or does not want to conduct a dialogue and chooses a selfish and arrogant tone with us, Russia will always find a way to defend its stance.

At the same time, unfortunately, everyone in the world seems to be used to the practice of politically motivated, illegal economic sanctions and to certain actors’ brutal attempts to impose their will on others by force. But today, this practice is degenerating into something even more dangerous – I am referring to the recently exposed direct interference in Belarus in an attempt to orchestrate a coup d’état and assassinate the President of that country. At the same time, it is typical that even such flagrant actions have not been condemned by the so-called collective West. Nobody seemed to notice. Everyone pretends nothing is happening.

But listen, you can think whatever you like of, say, Ukrainian President [Viktor] Yanukovych or [Nicolas] Maduro in Venezuela. I repeat, you can like or dislike them, including Yanukovych who almost got killed, too, and removed from power via an armed coup. You can have your own opinion of President of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko’s policy. But the practice of staging coups d’état and planning political assassinations, including those of high-ranking officials – well, this goes too far. This is beyond any limits.

Suffice it to mention the admission made by the detained participants in the conspiracy about a planned siege of Minsk, including plans to block the city infrastructure and communications, and a complete shutdown of the entire power system in the capital of Belarus! This actually means they were preparing a massive cyberattack. What else could it be? You know, you cannot just do it all with one switch.

Clearly, there is a reason why our Western colleagues have been stubbornly rejecting Russia’s numerous proposals to establish an international dialogue on information and cyber security. We have come up with these proposals many times. They avoid even discussing this matter.

What if there had been a real attempt at a coup d’état in Belarus? After all, this was the ultimate goal. How many people would have been hurt? What would have become of Belarus? Nobody is thinking about this.

Just as no one was thinking about the future of Ukraine during the coup in that country.

All the while, unfriendly moves towards Russia have also continued unabated. Some countries have taken up an unseemly routine where they pick on Russia for any reason, most often, for no reason at all. It is some kind of new sport of who shouts the loudest.

In this regard, we behave in an extremely restrained manner, I would even say, modestly, and I am saying this without irony. Often, we prefer not to respond at all, not just to unfriendly moves, but even to outright rudeness. We want to maintain good relations with everyone who participates in the international dialogue. But we see what is happening in real life. As I said, every now and then they are picking on Russia, for no reason. And of course, all sorts of petty Tabaquis are running around them like Tabaqui ran around Shere Khan – everything is like in Kipling's book – howling along in order to make their sovereign happy. Kipling was a great writer.

We really want to maintain good relations with all those engaged in international communication, including, by the way, those with whom we have not been getting along lately, to put it mildly. We really do not want to burn bridges. But if someone mistakes our good intentions for indifference or weakness and intends to burn or even blow up these bridges, they must know that Russia's response will be asymmetrical, swift and tough.

Those behind provocations that threaten the core interests of our security will regret what they have done in a way they have not regretted anything for a long time.

At the same time, I just have to make it clear, we have enough patience, responsibility, professionalism, self-confidence and certainty in our cause, as well as common sense, when making a decision of any kind. But I hope that no one will think about crossing the “red line” with regard to Russia. We ourselves will determine in each specific case where it will be drawn.

I will now say, just as I always do during the annual addresses to the Federal Assembly, that the improvement and qualitative strengthening of Russia’s Armed Forces continues on a regular basis. In particular, special attention will be given to the development of military education both at military school and academies and at military training centres at civilian universities.

By 2024, the share of modern weapons and military equipment in the armed forces will reach nearly 76 percent, which is a very good indicator. This share in the nuclear triad will be over 88 percent before this year is out.

Standing on combat duty are the latest Avangard hypersonic intercontinental missile systems and the Peresvet combat laser systems, and the first regiment armed with Sarmat super-heavy intercontinental ballistic missiles is scheduled to go on combat duty in late 2022.

The number of combat air systems with Kinzhal hypersonic missiles, and warships armed with precision hypersonic weapons such as Kinzhal that I mentioned, and with the Kalibr missiles, is increasing. The Tsirkon hypersonic missiles will be put on combat duty soon. Work is underway on other modern combat systems, including Poseidon and Burevestnik, in accordance with the development plans of the Armed Forces.

As the leader in the creation of new-generation combat systems and in the development of modern nuclear forces, Russia is urging its partners once again to discuss the issues related to strategic armaments and to ensuring global stability. The subject matter and the goal of these talks could be the creation of an environment for a conflict-free coexistence based on the security equation, which would include not only the traditional strategic armaments, such as intercontinental ballistic missiles, heavy bombers and submarines, but – I would like to emphasise this – all offensive and defensive systems capable of attaining strategic goals regardless of the armament.

The five nuclear countries bear special responsibility. I hope that the initiative on a personal meeting of the heads of state of the permanent members of the UN Security Council, which we proposed last year, will materialise and will be held as soon as the epidemiological situation allows.

Russia is always open to broad international cooperation. We have consistently advocated the preservation and strengthening of the key role of the United Nations in international affairs, and we try to provide assistance to the settlement of regional conflicts and have already done a great deal to stabilise the situation in Syria and to launch a political dialogue in Libya. As you know, Russia played the main role in stopping the armed conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh.

It is on the basis of mutual respect that we are building relations with the absolute majority of the world’s countries: in Asia, Latin America, Africa and many European countries. We are consistently expanding as a priority contacts with our closest partners in the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation, BRICS, the Commonwealth of Independent States, and our allies in the Collective Security Treaty Organisation.

Our common projects in the Eurasian Economic Union are aimed at ensuring economic growth and the wellbeing of our people. There are new, interesting projects here, such as the development of transport-and-logistics corridors. I am sure they will become a reliable infrastructure backbone for large-scale Eurasian partnership. The Russian ideas of this broad, open association are already being put into practice, in part, via alignment with other integration processes.

All these projects are not just geopolitical ideas but strictly practical instruments for resolving national development tasks.

Colleagues,

I began today’s Address with urgent healthcare issues, and concluding it, I would like to say the following. Nobody in the world knew what misfortune we would have to face. However, we, citizens of Russia, have already done much and will do all we can to counter the threat of the epidemic. Our country has reliable resources for this. We created them in healthcare, science, education and industry in previous years.

However, we must definitely move forward. We have mapped out national development tasks. Naturally, the challenge of the epidemic has made objective adjustments to our work. Today’s Address contains instructions on demography and family support, as well as on efforts to fight poverty, increase incomes, create jobs, improve the business environment and raise state management to a new level.

I would like to ask the Government to focus on these tasks in preparing new initiatives on Russia’s socioeconomic development and instruct it to present them by July 1 of this year.

What do I have in mind? Doing everyday work, we must certainly not forget about our strategic development goals and our national development goals, and we must improve the mechanisms for reaching them.

We will discuss the Government’s proposals with the participation of the relevant State Council commissions, our business associations, experts and the Civic Chamber. Following such a broad discussion, we will make final decisions on further financial and organisational actions at the meeting of the Council for Strategic Development and National Projects.

Now I would like to address all citizens of Russia once again to say that we will do everything in our power to achieve the goals set. I am sure we will move forward together and accomplish all the tasks that we have set for ourselves.

Thank you very much for your attention.



////



Presidential Address to the Federal Assembly
Event_Date: 15/1/2020
Event_Time: 13:15
Event_Place: Moscow

Members of the Federation Council, State Duma deputies, fellow Russians,

The Presidential Address to the Federal Assembly is delivered at the very beginning of the year for the first time. We need to address large-scale social, economic and technological tasks facing the country more quickly and without delay.

Their content and guidelines are reflected in the national projects, whose implementation will require a new quality of state governance and work on the part of the Government and state bodies at all levels, as well as direct dialogue with citizens.

Our society is clearly calling for change. People want development, and they strive to move forward in their careers and knowledge, in achieving prosperity, and they are ready to assume responsibility for specific work. Quite often, they have better knowledge of what, how and when should be changed where they live and work, that is, in cities, districts, villages and all across the nation.

The pace of change must be expedited every year and produce tangible results in attaining worthy living standards that would be clearly perceived by the people. And, I repeat, they must be actively involved in this process.

Colleagues,

Russia’s future and historical perspective depend on how many of us there are (I would like to start the main part of my Address with demography), how many children are born in Russian families in one, five or ten years, on these children’s upbringing, on what kind of people they become and what they will do for the country, as well as on the values they choose as their mainstay in life.

There are nearly 147 million of us now. But we have entered a difficult, a very difficult demographic period. The measures we took starting in the mid-2000s have had a positive effect on demography. We have even reached a stage of natural increase. This is why we have more children at schools now.

However, new families are being created now by the small generation of the 1990s. And the birth rate is falling again. This is the main problem of the current demographic period in Russia.

The aggregate birth rate, which is the key index showing the number of births per woman, was only 1.5 in 2019, according to tentative estimates. Is this few or many? It is not enough for our country. It is approximately equal to the figure reported in many European countries. But it is not enough for Russia.

I can tell you by way of comparison that the figure was 1.3 in 1943, during the Great Patriotic War. It was only lower in the 1990s: 1.16 in 1999, lower even than during the Great Patriotic War. There were very few families with two children, and some couples had to put off starting a family.

I want to say once again that we are alarmed by the negative demographic forecasts. It is our historic duty to respond to this challenge. We must not only get out of this demographic trap but ensure a sustainable natural population growth by 2025. The aggregate birth rate must be 1.7 in 2024.

Demography is a sector where universal or parochial solutions cannot be effective. Each step we take and each new law or government programme we adopt must be scrutinised from the viewpoint of our top national priority – the preservation and increase of Russia’s population.

As we build a long-term policy to support families, it must be based on specific life situations. We need to look closely at difficulties faced by new families, families with many children or single-parent families.

The most sensitive and crucial issue is the opportunity to enrol one’s child in a day nursery. Earlier, we allocated funds from the federal budget to help the regions create 255,000 new places in day nurseries by the end of 2021. However, in 2018 to 2019, instead of 90,000, 78,000 new places were created, out of which only 37,500 places can actually be provided to kids. Other places are unavailable simply because an educational licence is still not obtained. This means that these nurseries are not ready to enrol children.

Governors, heads of other constituent entities, my dear colleagues, this is not how work is done. Come on! It means we have created 77,700 places that are still not fully available. Half of them cannot operate – and we must create 177,300 by 2021. I am asking you to do everything (although it will be very difficult now, however, it needs to be done) to close this gap. Once again, we must work across all areas of family support.

But there is a daunting challenge that directly threatens our demographic future and it is the low income of a significant part of our citizens and families.

According to various estimates, roughly 70 to 80 percent of low-income families are families with children. You are well aware of this. It often happens that even when not one but both parents work, the income of such a family is still very modest.

What decisions have already been made? From January 2020, families with incomes below two subsistence minimums per person will receive monthly benefits for their first and second child. Moreover, these benefits will be paid until the child reaches the age of three rather than 18 months as was the case before. The benefit amount will depend on the subsistence minimum in a specific region. The nationwide average is over 11,000 rubles per child per month. Once again, this is an average and depends on a specific region.

Additionally, with the support of the federal budget we have started paying benefits for the third child and subsequent children in 75 constituent entities, now including all regions in the Urals, Siberia and the Far East.

All of this amounts to substantial support. But the following thought has crossed my mind, and I believe that you also realise this. Parents stop receiving payments when their child turns three, and this means that their family can immediately face financial problems. To be honest, this is happening already. We must prevent this, especially since I realise that mothers often find it hard to combine working and caring for their children before they start school.

We know from the experience of our own children and grandchildren that they often fall ill. Their mothers are therefore unable to work. In this connection, I suggest we introduce monthly payments for children aged between three and seven starting already from January 1, 2020.

Who will be covered by this measure, and how is it supposed to function?

Families whose incomes do not exceed per-capita subsistence minimum will receive these payments. That is, it concerns families facing a very difficult situation.

To obtain these payments, they will only have to file an application and list their official legal incomes. I would like to note that this procedure must become as convenient and simple as possible, so that people would be able to apply without queuing and clearing hurdles. Or they should do this online on the relevant state website.

As I have already said, incomes may vary from region to region. First stage payments will amount to 5,500 rubles, or 50 percent of the subsistence minimum. But that is not all. We will have to analyse and assess the operation of this system. And we will take the next step, if we see that some families are unable to achieve the subsistence minimum while receiving 5,500 rubles. From 2021, we will pay the subsistence minimum in full, or over 11,000 rubles, that will vary from region to region. I repeat, the specific sums will vary, but on average it will amount to 11,000 rubles per child per month.

We will need substantial resources for implementing the proposed measure, and we will also have to adjust the federal budget. I ask the Government and members of the Parliament to do this as quickly as possible. The regions should also complete their share of regulatory work.

What else should we do equally quickly?

In my Address last year I said that we should expand the system of social contracts. It should become an individual programme whereby every low-income family will be able to increase their income and enhance their quality of life. Under these contracts, the state will make regular payments to such families, finance retraining and advanced training and help them to find employment or start a small business.

While providing comprehensive assistance to low-income people, society and the state have a right to expect them to take steps as well to deal with their problems, including finding employment and taking a responsible attitude to their children and other family members.

The regions are already introducing the mechanism of social contracts. But it is not sufficiently effective yet, and it is not helping much to fight poverty or to increase family incomes.

Therefore, first of all I would like to ask the Government to analyse the experience of the pilot projects and revise the principles of social contracts. Second, we must increase financial assistance to the regions so that all of them introduce this mechanism in 2021.

I would like all our colleagues, including the regional heads, to note that we will assess their performance not by the number of social contracts signed but by poverty decline figures.

Colleagues,

Back in 2006, I said the following in my Address to the Federal Assembly: “And now for the most important matter. Indeed, what I want to talk about is love.” It was then that I proposed launching the maternity capital programme aimed at helping the families that decided to have their second child.

This programme will expire on December 31, 2021. I know than many people wonder what the state will do after that. We will extend this programme to December 31, 2026 at the least. We must do this without fail. But this measure only is no longer enough.

We must support young people who are starting their families and, I am sure, dreaming about having children. In this sense, I would like to introduce new, additional decisions concerning the maternity capital, which should also come into effect on January 1, 2020.

Even when the first child is born, the family will have the right to the full amount of the maternity capital, which is 466,617 rubles after the indexation in January 2020. This is the sum that was paid when the second or the next child was born. This support will give families a chance to prepare for the birth of their second child.

But I believe that this is still not enough in today’s conditions, considering the demographic challenges Russia is facing. We can and must do even more. I suggest increasing the maternity capital by a further 150,000 rubles. Families will have the right to this additional money for the maternity capital when their second child is born.

This means that the total amount of the maternity capital for a family with two children will amount to 616,617 rubles. It will be indexed annually in the future.

At the same time I believe that if a family already has a child, we must provide the new, increased maternity capital when the second child is born, which is, as I have already said, 616,617 rubles.

Let me add that we have already made the decision that when the third child is born, the government pays 450,000 rubles towards the family’s mortgage loan. This means that overall a family with three children will be able to invest over one million rubles to solve their housing problems with the help of the government. In many regions, cities, and even regional capitals this amounts to almost half of the cost of a house or a flat.

Let me also remind you that a reduced mortgage interest rate, six percent per year, for families with two or more children has been extended for the entire time of the loan, which resulted in the number of people using this support measure growing almost 10-fold at once.

A social programme for young families has been launched in the Far East: mortgage loans at 2 percent interest rate. I ask the banks, and not just the banks with state capital, to become more actively involved in its implementation.

And here is another highly important matter. I have already mentioned a new payment for children aged between three and seven. But this is not all that we can and must do. Yes, when children start attending school, their parents, especially mothers, get more opportunities to work and earn an additional income. However, families have to pay more in order to send their children to school, they face extra problems, and we have to support them at that stage. In this connection, I suggest providing free hot meals to all primary school students from grade one through four.

I will not conceal the fact that we have had heated discussions on this subject. On the whole, some colleagues do not object, but they say that it would not be very fair that people with decent incomes and low incomes should receive the same amount of support from the state. They are not saying this because they do not want to support the children. Indeed, this argument has its own logic. But there is another logic that prevails in our society: everyone must have equal opportunities, and children and their parents who are often demeaned by the current situation must not think that they are even unable to feed their children.

I believe that this is very important for our society. Yes, they tell me that these benefits were not available even during the Soviet period, when there was large-scale social support for the people. But there was no great social stratification at that time either. I believe that this measure will be justified.

In order to provide free hot and, most importantly, healthy meals, I suggest channelling funding from three sources: the federal, regional and local budgets. But money is not the only thing that matters. We need to create the required infrastructure at schools, set up cafeterias and lunchrooms and put in place a system for supplying high-quality food. I would like to note that this was not done even during Soviet times, as I have already said. This, of course, will require time. But free hot meals must be provided starting from September 1, 2020 in those regions and schools that have the required level of technical equipment. I ask our colleagues to expedite this work. Primary school students must start receiving high-quality hot meals free of charge in all regions from September 1, 2023.

So colleagues, here is the point I want to make, in short. I would like to emphasise – all the steps we are taking are aimed at creating a streamlined, large-scale and, most importantly, an effectively working family support programme, so that people’s incomes, especially for those raising children, are high enough for a decent life.

Secondly, what I said at the beginning of the Address: the steps that we took in previous years in the field of demographic development have already brought results. They have yielded results back then: a large generation is growing up in Russia. I am referring to children who are in preschool and primary school now. It is very important that they adopt the true values ​​of a large family – that family is love, happiness, the joy of motherhood and fatherhood, that family is a strong bond of several generations, united by respect for the elderly and care for children, giving everyone a sense of confidence, security, and reliability. If the younger generations accept this situation as natural, as a moral and an integral part and reliable background support for their adult life, then we will be able to meet the historical challenge of guaranteeing Russia’s development as a large and successful country.

Colleagues,

Supporting families and family values ​​is always a forward-looking strategy addressing the generations that are to live in an age of tremendous technological and social changes, and something that will determine Russia’s fate in the 21st century. So, to have these new generations participate in creating this future even now, to have them fully reveal their potential, we must create the necessary conditions for them, primarily for every child in every region of Russia to get a good education.

In the middle of the coming decade, Russia will have about 19 million schoolchildren, which is 6 million more than in 2010. Some say it is too difficult to influence objective demographic processes, so it is unadvisable to channel large resources for demographic development. However, in reality, we can see direct evidence of the opposite: family support policies are working, and sometimes their results even exceed our wildest expectations. It is great that there are so many children in our schools again. On the other hand, this situation should not affect the comfort and quality of their learning.

I ask the Government to coordinate with the regions, consider the demographic and other factors, estimate how many more children the schools need to serve, and make the necessary changes to the Education National Project. That will require flexible solutions: not only to build more schools, but also to efficiently use the entire educational and other infrastructure we have for these purposes, as well as the benefits of modern technology for education.

Almost all schools in Russia have internet access now. In 2021, they should no longer just be connected, but have high-speed internet access to fully embrace the digital transformation in national education; teachers and students should have access to advanced educational programmes; individual approach to teaching should be practiced to reveal each child’s talents.

Our network of extracurricular technology and engineering centres is developing dynamically. Our children should also benefit from a modern environment for practicing music, art, and other forms of creativity.

Russia is allocating more than 8 billion rubles for equipment and musical instruments for children's art schools as part of the Culture National Project. But the problem is much wider. More than 1,000 art school premises are dilapidated and not fit for use as intended. I would like to ask the Government to help the regions improve them. And I ask the regional authorities not to forget that this is their responsibility.

Furthermore, a modern school implies forward-looking teaching staff enjoying high social status and prestige. By the middle of the next decade, the national professional advancement system should canvas at least half of the country's teachers, in the future including additional professional training, along with general education workers.

Class teachers are closest to their pupils. Their ongoing daily work including mentoring children and teaching them the right ways is a huge responsibility, and definitely requires special training and special support for these mentors. In this regard, I consider it necessary to introduce, from September 1, at least 5,000 rubles in additional payment to them financed from the federal budget.

There is a lot of controversy about this decision, because this is actually the responsibility of the regions. Those present in this room are well aware of this. But what is a class teacher? A mentor and supervisor, and those are federal functions.

But, of course, I would like to point this out: all current regional payments to class teachers should continue, colleagues; I am calling your attention to this. And I will definitely look at what will be happening in practice, in real life.

I pointed out more than once that the pay parameters for teachers, doctors and other public sector employees set out in the May 2012 Executive Orders must be strictly complied with. There is a reason why I keep returning to this subject. If we slacken control of this matter, this will create the temptation to neglect these provisions, as many of those present here know. This must not be allowed. I would like to emphasise that the issue concerns professionals working in the spheres of vital significance for society and the country, and they must receive good and fair pay for their work.

The number of school graduates will be increasing in the next few years. In light of this, we must ensure equal and fair access to free intramural university education. Therefore, I suggest that the number of university scholarships be increased every year. Moreover – what I am going to say next is very important, the priority in this matter must be given to regional universities, especially the regions that are lacking doctors, teachers and engineers.

Of course, we must not simply enrol more students but boost the development of regional universities with support from businesses and employers. In particular, we must strengthen their training, research and social infrastructure, as well as improve the system of training and advanced training of teachers for regional universities so that students receive up-to-date knowledge and can have successful careers in their regions.

The employment market is changing rapidly, with new professions appearing and higher requirements made to the existing ones. Our universities must be able to respond to these changes flexibly and quickly. I believe that third-year students must be offered an opportunity to choose a new path or curriculum, including related professions. This is not easy to do, but we must indeed do this. To ensure that talented and decent people play a major or leading role in our national development, we have launched the Russia – Land of Opportunity project. Over 3.5 million people have taken part in its competitions and Olympiads. We will continue to improve this system.

Colleagues,

Last year life expectancy in Russia exceeded 73 years for the first time, which is eight years longer than in 2000. This is the result of social and economic changes in Russia, the development of mass sports and promotion of healthy lifestyles. And, of course, the entire healthcare system made a significant contribution, especially the programmes of specialised, including high-tech aid, as well as maternity and childhood welfare and protection of health of mother and child.

The rate of infant mortality has reached a historic low. This indicator is even better than in some European countries. I am well aware that the public in many developed countries is very critical of the state of their national healthcare system, and you also know this. In fact, almost everywhere – no, everywhere – people criticise their healthcare system, however well organised it looks from here.

Still our achievements in this area show that if we set certain goals, we can achieve results. However, let me repeat this, people do not judge the healthcare system by figures and indicators. A person who has to travel dozens of kilometres to a polyclinic or spend a whole day waiting in line for an appointment with a specialist is not very interested in how life expectancy has grown on the average. People think about their lives, their health, about how to get high-quality and timely medical aid without obstacles and when they need it. This is why now we must focus our efforts on primary care, which all people and all families have to deal with. This is where we have the worst and most sensitive problems.

This year we are to fully complete the creation of a network of rural paramedic centres, as stipulated in the related national project. This does not mean, however, that all the problems of these rural paramedic centres have been settled. I would like to point out that the mission of these centres is not to make out prescriptions or refer patients to regional medical centres. Local specialists must be able to really help people by using modern equipment and high-speed internet. I would like to ask the Russian Popular Front to monitor the provision of equipment, construction and repair of rural paramedic centres.

On July 1 we will also launch a programme to modernise the system of primary healthcare. We will have to repair and provide new equipment to outpatient clinics, rural hospitals and first-aid stations in all our regions. We have allocated an additional 550 billion rubles for this purpose, more than 90 percent of which will come from the federal budget.

At the same time, I ask the regional authorities to find additional funds for providing housing to doctors and paramedics, in particular in villages, settlements and small towns, and to use all the available instruments towards this end, including employer-rented housing and private housing projects.

Training and recruitment are key elements of medical education. By 2024, all levels of healthcare, but first of all the primary healthcare level, must have the necessary number of specialists. In this connection, I suggest that the admission procedure to medical universities be changed significantly. For example, 70 percent of scholarships in the field of general medicine and 75 percent in paediatrics will be awarded to prospective students who will return to their native regions upon graduation. The quotas will be distributed based on requests filed by the regions, which must subsequently provide employment to the graduates who must be able to work where people need their services.

As for residency training, I suggest that almost 100 percent of scholarships be given to medical graduates in critically important spheres. Priority during enrolment will be given to those with practical experience in the field of primary healthcare, especially in rural areas. This system should be also stipulated for federal medical centres.

And lastly, just as we agreed, a new system of remuneration will be gradually introduced in healthcare starting this year. It is based on clear, fair and understandable rules, with a fixed share of salary in the overall income and a uniform list of compensation payments and commercial incentives for all regions.

I am aware that the implementation of all these goals requires extensive resources. If you go back to where I started, every goal needs a great deal of money. In this regard, I ask the Government to once again consider identifying priorities for our development while retaining the budget’s stability. This is an advantage we have achieved in the past few years, and we must maintain it.

I know that last year a number of regions saw a disruption in medication supplies as the regions’ purchases were not made, with certain officials treating it as if it were some sort of office supplies purchases claiming it was not a big deal and new tenders would be announced. But people were left without essential and vitally important medications. I should point out that such cases must never happen again.

This year, efforts will be made to launch an integrated comprehensive register of recipients of medications that are provided to citizens free of charge or with a considerable discount through a federal or regional subsidy to avoid any confusion in this regard in the future.

Also, certain legislative decisions have already been adopted that will allow for official and centralised imports of certain medications to Russia that are yet to receive regulatory approval. I ask the Government to promptly organise this work so that people, particularly the parents of sick children, do not find themselves in a desperate situation when they cannot legally find the necessary medications.

Control over pharmaceutical drugs will also significantly change. It will be tightened both at pharmaceutical companies and during all stages of medication circulation, including at pharmacy networks.

Colleagues,

In recent years, we have focused on strengthening macroeconomic sustainability, and it is something I just mentioned. The federal budget has had a surplus again. Our government reserves confidently cover our gross external debt. And here I am not talking about some abstract or theoretical indicators – I would like to emphasise that these figures are directly influencing the life of each and every person in our country, and have to do with the fulfilment of our social commitments. We can see the problems, even shocks that citizens of other states face, where government had no such cash cushion and their financial position turned out to be unstable.

The consistent work of the Government and the Bank of Russia has led to a stabilisation of prices. Last year, inflation stood at 3 percent, which is below the target level of 4 percent. True, the prices of certain goods and services have risen slightly, but overall, I repeat, inflation is at a predictably low level. The situation fundamentally differs from what it was five or ten years ago, when double-digit inflation was a tax on all citizens of the country, being an especially hard burden for those on a fixed salary or pension – retired people and workers in the public sector.

Now, relying on a stable macroeconomic foundation, we need to create conditions for a substantial increase in people’s real incomes. Again, this is the most important responsibility of the Government and the Central Bank. To meet it, the national economy needs structural changes and higher efficiency. In 2021, Russia's GDP growth rates should be higher than the global ones.

To have this kind of dynamics, it is necessary to launch a new investment cycle, to seriously increase investment in the creation and upgrading of jobs, in infrastructure, in the development of industry, agriculture and the services sector. Starting this year, annual investment growth should be at least 5 percent, and investment share in the country's GDP, 25 percent by 2024 from the current 21 percent.

What needs to be done to encourage investment?

First of all, we agreed not to change the tax treatment for businesses over a period of the next six years and thus provide a wider horizon for investment planning. The deputies and the Government should speed up the adoption of a package of draft laws on protecting and promoting investment. As you are well aware, tax treatment for major important projects should remain unchanged for up to 20 years, and the requirements and standards for building production sites should remain the same for three years. These investor guarantees should become standard law.

Of course, in addition to major projects, small- and medium-sized businesses’ initiatives should be supported as well. Today, the regions are entitled to provide an investment-based tax deduction and a three-year revenue tax break, but they rarely use them. It is clear why: they do so because regional budgets thus lose revenue. In this regard, we would like federal funds to compensate the regions for two-thirds of the lost revenue stemming from the use of an investment-related tax deduction.

Second, the reform of the oversight and supervisory activities must be completed in 2020, and businesses should thus see improvements in their operating environment.

Third, I have already submitted to the State Duma the amendments to remove vague criminal law provisions in part related to so-called frauds. Thus, entrepreneurs have repeatedly mentioned Article 210 of the Criminal Code, under which any company whose senior executives violated the law could qualify as an organised criminal group, meaning that almost all of its employees were liable. Tougher restrictive measures and punishment were put in place. Law enforcement agencies will henceforth be required to prove that an organisation or a company was initially deliberately created with an illegal purpose in mind.

Fourth. It is estimated that as soon as this summer the foreign currency reserves of the National Welfare Fund will pass the mark of 7 percent of GDP. We have accumulated these reserves to guarantee our stability and security, which means we can invest our additional revenue in development and the national economy.

Cost-effective projects that remove infrastructure restrictions for our territories must become our priority. This includes bypass roads for big cities, arterial roads between regional capitals and exit roads to federal motorways. These projects will inevitably bring about the growth of small businesses, tourism and social activity in the regions and locally.

Fifth. For investment to grow steadily, our economy needs long-term money. We all know this very well. This is a direct responsibility of the Central Bank. I appreciate its consistent course for making loans for the real sector of economy more accessible.

Of course, businesses, companies (especially large ones) must remember about their social and environmental responsibility. I would like to thank our parliament members for demonstrating integrity during their work on the emission quota law.

Obviously, it is necessary to act upon our plans faster. Our next steps include testing and implementing the air quality monitoring system and subsequently expanding this control system to cover the entire country. It is necessary to monitor not only the condition of air but also water and soil – that is, to develop a comprehensive environmental monitoring system.

Next. By the end of this year, at least 80 out of the 300 largest industrial facilities must complete the transition to best available technology and obtain complex environmental permits, which means a consistent reduction of hazardous emissions. Sixteen permits have been issued as of now but overall this work is on schedule. No matter what, we must not allow any disruptions here. It is necessary to drastically cut the amount of waste ending up in landfills, implement waste sorting and generally move towards the circular economy. By 2021, we must already launch the mechanism of extended producer responsibility when producers and importers of goods and packaging are responsible for recycling costs. To put it simply, contaminators must pay.

Colleagues,

I would like to stress that Russia is ready to support Russian and foreign scientists’ joint research on ecology, climate change, environmental and ocean pollution. These are global development challenges shared by everyone.

Today the speed of technological change in the world is increasing manifold, and we must create our own technologies and standards in areas that define our future, such as, first of all, artificial intelligence, genetics, new materials, energy sources and digital technology. I am confident that we can reach a breakthrough here, as we did in defence. I will speak about this later.

In order to solve difficult technological tasks, we will continue to develop research infrastructure, including megascience-class facilities. I am sure that an opportunity to work with unique equipment and tackle the most ambitious tasks will encourage talented young people to work in science. This is already happening. According to estimates, by the middle of the decade every second scientist in Russia will be under 40.

We should give researchers, engineers and entrepreneurs the freedom they need to do their work and to conduct innovative scientific research. I ask the Government and State Duma deputies to fast-track the discussion of the technological legislative package. This year we must launch a flexible mechanism of experimental legal modes to design and introduce new technologies in Russia and establish up-to-date regulation of the big data turnover.

Next, we should establish a mechanism of social support for direct and venture finance tools based on the best global practices. The technological entrepreneur should have the right to take a risk, so that failing to implement an idea will not automatically mean inappropriate use of funds and a possible criminal prosecution. I mean that we should establish such legal and financial conditions that as many start-ups and pioneer teams as possible could become strong and successful innovative companies.

We need to support the export of high-tech products and, of course, to boost domestic demand for innovative products. In this context, I believe it would be right to fast-track the digital transformation of the real economy. A requirement should be set that national projects are largely carried out using domestic software.

We have already put in place, say, major digital television infrastructure, which, in terms of its technical characteristics, is one of the most advanced in the world. Currently, the digital television coverage in Russia is more expanded than, for example, in France, Austria or Switzerland.

The internet has become a must-have for people today. Russia is one of few countries in the world which has its own social networks, messengers, e-mail and search engines and other national resources.

Given all the things I’ve just mentioned, I suggest that the Affordable Internet project be developed and carried out and that free access to socially important domestic internet services be available across Russia. I repeat that in this case people will not have to pay for the internet service, for internet traffic.

Colleagues,

The high availability of the internet should become Russia’s and our citizens’ competitive advantage and create, across the board, an environment conducive to education, creative work, communications and the implementation of social and cultural projects. Of course, this means new opportunities for people to get involved in the life of the country. We appreciate every creative initiative of our citizens, public associations, non-profit organisations, as well as their willingness to contribute to national development.

It is very important that the volunteer movement is becoming more popular, and it unites schoolchildren, university students, and people of different generations and ages. The Victory Volunteers project embodies the tradition of mutual assistance and respect for older generations and our history.

This year, we will celebrate the 75th anniversary of Victory in the Great Patriotic War. For Russia, May 9 is the greatest and sacred holiday. We are proud of the generation of victors and honour their feat, and our memory is not only a tribute to our heroic past, but it also serves our future, inspires us and strengthens our unity.

It is our duty to defend the truth about the Victory; otherwise what shall we say to our children if a lie, like a disease, spreads all over the world? We must set facts against outrageous lies and attempts to distort history. Russia will create the largest and most complete set of archival documents, film and photo materials on the Second World War, accessible both for our citizens and for the whole world. This work is our duty as a winning country and our responsibility to the future generations.

Colleagues,

We can see how unpredictably, uncontrollably events are developing in the world, what is happening in the Middle East and North Africa literally in recent weeks and recent days, how regional conflicts can rapidly grow into threats to the entire international community.

I am convinced that it is high time for a serious and direct discussion about the basic principles of a stable world order and the most acute problems that humanity is facing. It is necessary to show political will, wisdom and courage. The time demands an awareness of our shared responsibility and real actions.

The founding countries of the United Nations should set an example. It is the five nuclear powers that bear a special responsibility for the conservation and sustainable development of humankind. These five nations should first of all start with measures to remove the prerequisites for a global war and develop updated approaches to ensuring stability on the planet that would fully take into account the political, economic and military aspects of modern international relations.

Russia is ready to enhance cooperation with all interested parties. We are not threatening anyone or seeking to impose our will on anyone. At the same time, I can assure everyone that our efforts to strengthen national security were made in a timely manner and in sufficient volume. For the first time ever – I want to emphasise this – for the first time in the history of nuclear missile weapons, including the Soviet period and modern times, we are not catching up with anyone, but, on the contrary, other leading states have yet to create the weapons that Russia already possesses.

The country's defence capability is ensured for decades to come, but we cannot rest on our laurels and do nothing. We must keep moving forward, carefully observing and analysing the developments in this area across the world, and create next-generation combat systems and complexes. This is what we are doing today.

Reliable security creates the basis for Russia’s progressive and peaceful development and allows us to do much more to overcome the most pressing internal challenges, to focus on the economic and social growth of all our regions in the interest of the people, because Russia’s greatness is inseparable from dignified life of its every citizen. I see this harmony of a strong power and well-being of the people as a foundation of our future.

Colleagues,

We can move towards this goal only with the active participation of society, our citizens and, of course, intense and productive work of all branches and levels of government, the potential of which should be expanded.

In this regard, I would like to spend a moment discussing state structure and domestic policy, which are defined by the Fundamental Law of our country – the Constitution of the Russian Federation. I keep getting these questions all the time, including at the most recent annual news conference.

Clearly, we cannot but agree with those who say that the Constitution was adopted over 25 years ago amidst a severe internal political crisis and the state of affairs has completely overturned since then. Thank goodness, there is no more armed confrontation in the capital or a hotbed of international terrorism in the North Caucasus.

Despite a number of acute unsolved problems that we talked about today, the socioeconomic situation has stabilised, after all. Today some political public associations are raising the issue of adopting a new Constitution.

I want to answer straight off: I believe there is no need for this. Potential of the 1993 Constitution is far from being exhausted and I hope that pillars of our constitutional system, rights and freedoms will remain the foundation of strong values for the Russian society for decades to come.

In the meantime, statements regarding changes to the Constitution have already been made. And I find it possible to express my view and propose a number of constitutional amendments for discussion, amendments that, in my opinion, are reasonable and important for the further development of Russia as a rule-of-law welfare state where citizens’ freedoms and rights, human dignity and wellbeing constitute the highest value.

Firstly, Russia can be and can remain Russia only as a sovereign state. Our nation’s sovereignty must be unconditional. We have done a great deal to achieve this. We restored our state’s unity. We have overcome the situation when certain powers in the government were essentially usurped by oligarch clans. Russia has returned to international politics as a country whose opinion cannot be ignored.

We created powerful reserves, which multiplies our country’s stability and capability to protect its citizens’ social rights and the national economy from any attempts of foreign pressure.

I truly believe that it is time to introduce certain changes to our country’s main law, changes that will directly guarantee the priority of the Russian Constitution in our legal framework.

What does it mean? It means literally the following: requirements of international law and treaties as well as decisions of international bodies can be valid on the Russian territory only to the point that they do not restrict the rights and freedoms of our people and citizens and do not contradict our Constitution.

Second, I suggest formalising at the constitutional level the obligatory requirements for those who hold positions of critical significance for national security and sovereignty. More precisely, the heads of the constituent entities, members of the Federation Council, State Duma deputies, the prime minister and his/her deputies, federal ministers, heads of federal agencies and judges should have no foreign citizenship or residence permit or any other document that allows them to live permanently in a foreign state.

The goal and mission of state service is to serve the people, and those who enter this path must know that by doing this they inseparably connect their lives with Russia and the Russian people without any assumptions and allowances.

Requirements must be even stricter for presidential candidates. I suggest formalising a requirement under which presidential candidates must have had permanent residence in Russia for at least 25 years and no foreign citizenship or residence permit and not only during the election campaign but at any time before it too.

I know that people are discussing the constitutional provision under which one person cannot hold the post of the President of the Russian Federation for more than two consecutive terms. I do not regard this as a matter of principle, but I nevertheless support and share this view.

I have already said before that our goal is to ensure high living standards and equal opportunities for all throughout the country. It is towards this goal that our national projects and development plans are aimed.

At the same time, you know about the problems to do with education, healthcare and other fields created by a divide between the federal and municipal authorities – I have pointed this out more than once. This divide and, at the same time, the complex system of powers are having a negative effect above all on the people.

The rights, opportunities and guarantees, that are legally equal for all citizens, are not provided equally in different regions and municipalities. This is unfair to people and is directly threatening our society and national integrity.

I believe that the Constitution must seal the principles of a unified system of public authority and effective interaction between the federal and municipal authorities. At the same time, the powers and practical opportunities of the local governments, a body of authority that is closest to the people, can and should be expanded and strengthened.

And lastly, the state must honour its social responsibility under any conditions throughout the country. Therefore, I believe that the Constitution should include a provision that the minimum wage in Russia must not be below the subsistence minimum of the economically active people. We have a law on this, but we should formalise this requirement in the Constitution along with the principles of decent pensions, which implies a regular adjustment of pensions according to inflation.

Fourth, Russia is a huge country, and every region has its specifics, problems and experience. Of course, this must be taken into account. I believe it is necessary to cardinally increase the role of governors in decision-making at the federal level. As you know, back in 2000 the State Council was restored at my initiative, where the heads of all regions participate. Over the past period the State Council has proven its high effectiveness; its working groups provide for the professional, comprehensive and qualified examination of issues that are most important for people and Russia. I believe it would be appropriate to fix the status and role of the State Council in the Russian Constitution.

Fifth, Russian society is becoming more mature, responsible and demanding. Despite the differences in the ways to address their tasks, the main political forces speak from the position of patriotism and reflect the interests of their followers and voters.

At the same time, almost all the parties represented in the State Duma – and you know that I have regular meetings with their leaders – believe that the Federal Assembly is ready to take more responsibility for forming the Government. (Applause.) I expected this round of applause, but I think you will have another opportunity for applause now; please listen until the end.

More responsibility for forming the Government means more responsibility for the Government’s policy. I completely agree with this position.

What is the situation like now? In accordance with articles 111 and 112 of the Russian Constitution, the President only receives the consent of the State Duma to appoint the Prime Minister, and then appoints the head of the Cabinet, his deputies and all the ministers. I suggest changing the procedure and allowing the State Duma to appoint the Prime Minister of the Russian Federation, and then all deputy prime ministers and federal ministers at the Prime Minister’s recommendation. At the same time the President will have to appoint them, so he will have no right to turn down the candidates approved by the Parliament. (Applause.)

All of this means drastic changes to the political system. However, let me repeat, considering the maturity of our main political organisations and parties as well as the reputation of civil society, I believe these proposals are justified. This will increase the role and importance of the State Duma and parliamentary parties as well as the independence and responsibility of the Prime Minister and other Cabinet members and make cooperation between the representative and executive branches of government more effective and substantive.

Colleagues,

I would like to emphasise that our country, with its vast territory, complex federal and administrative division and diverse cultural and historical traditions, cannot properly advance and even exist sustainably as a parliamentary republic.

Russia must remain a strong presidential republic. The president must undoubtedly retain the right to determine the Government's tasks and priorities, as well as the right to dismiss the prime minister, his deputies and federal ministers in case of improper execution of duties or due to loss of trust. The president also exercises direct command over the Armed Forces and the entire law enforcement system. In this regard, I believe another step is necessary to provide a greater balance between the branches of power.

In this connection, point six: I propose that the president should appoint heads of all security agencies following consultations with the Federation Council. I believe this approach will make the work of security and law enforcement agencies more transparent and accountable to citizens.

The principle of appointment following consultations can be applied to regional prosecutors as well. Currently they are appointed in coordination with regional legislative assemblies. Colleagues, this may lead to certain, including informal, obligations towards local authorities and ultimately to the risk of losing objectivity and impartiality.

As to the territories' position regarding a prosecutor candidacy in the constituent entities of the Federation, it can be considered during consultations in the Federation Council, which is in fact the chamber of the regions. We cannot have different local legislative systems in different regions; the prosecutor is a supreme authority who exercises control over the execution of laws irrespectively of any regional circumstances.

I am confident that a greater independence of prosecution agencies from local authorities would be beneficial for citizens regardless of the region. Colleagues, let us always be governed by the interests of our people.

And my seventh and final point: the judicial system – the Constitutional and Supreme courts – plays a key role in ensuring legality and citizens’ rights. I would like to emphasise, along with judges’ professionalism, their credibility should be unconditional as well. Being fair and having a moral right to make decisions that affect people’s lives have always been considered of paramount importance in Russia. The country’s fundamental law should enshrine and protect the independence of judges, and their subordination only to the Constitution and federal law.

At the same time, I consider it necessary to stipulate in the Constitution the Federation Council’s authority to dismiss, on the proposal from the President, Constitutional and Supreme Court judges in the event of misconduct that defames a judge’s honour and dignity, as well as in other cases provided for by federal constitutional law, that make it impossible for a person to maintain the status of a judge. This proposal is derived from the established practice. This is something Russia definitely needs today.

Furthermore, to improve the quality of domestic legislation, to reliably protect citizens' interests, I propose strengthening the role of the Constitutional Court, namely: to verify, at the President’s request, the constitutionality of draft laws adopted by the Federal Assembly before they are signed by the head of state. We might also think about extending the powers of the Constitutional Court to evaluate not only laws, but also other regulatory legal acts adopted by various authorities at the federal and regional levels for compliance with the Constitution.

Colleagues,

Again, the proposals made today, by no means limit the discussion around possible amendments to the Constitution. I am sure that public associations, parties, regions, the legal community, and Russian citizens will express their ideas. The broadest public discussion is needed. But, opening this discussion, I would like to give it a start in a certain direction, or at least to show what challenges we are facing.

Please, do not forget what happened to our country after 1991. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, we still had the same ambitions and of course have preserved the colossal potential – the human, intellectual, resource, territorial, cultural and historical potential, and so on. But there were also threats, dangers of a magnitude no one could have imagined ever before. And that was a pity, as they should have thought about it in due time.

Therefore in our further state building efforts, we are facing seemingly contradictory tasks that serve as a guideline for values and may appear incompatible at first sight. What am I referring to? We must create a solid, reliable and invulnerable system that will be absolutely stable in terms of the external contour and will securely guarantee Russia’s independence and sovereignty. At the same time, this system must be organic, flexible and capable of changing quickly in line with what is happening around us, and most importantly, in response to the development of Russian society. This system must ensure the rotation of those who are in power or occupy high positions in other areas. This renewal is indispensable for the progressive evolution of society and stable development that may not be infallible but ensures that the most important thing – Russia’s interests ­– remains immutable.

What else do I consider important and would like to emphasise? The amendments that we will discuss do not concern the foundations of the Constitution and, hence, can be approved by Parliament in line with the existing procedure and law through the adoption of relevant constitutional laws.

At the same time, considering that the proposed amendments concern substantial changes in the political system and the work of the executive, legislative and judicial branches, I believe it necessary to hold a vote of Russian citizens on the entire package of the proposed amendments to the Constitution of the Russian Federation. The final decision must be made only on the basis of its results.

The opinion of people, our citizens as the bearers of sovereignty and the main source of power must be decisive. In the final analysis everything is decided by the people, both today and in the future. I am referring to both the choice of national development strategy and daily issues in each region, city or village. We will be able to build a strong, prosperous and modern Russia only on the basis of unconditional respect for the opinions of the people, the opinions of the nation.

The current year of 2020 is a landmark in many respects. It is a transition to the third decade of the 21st century. Russia is faced with breakthrough historical tasks and everyone’s contribution is important for resolving them. Working together we are bound to change our lives for the better. I often mention the word “together” because Russia means all of us. I am referring not to the people present in this hall or rather not only to the people present in this hall but all citizens of this country because I believe that success is determined by our will for creation and development, for the implementation of the most ambitious plans, our labour for the sake of our families and loved ones, our children and their future, and hence, for the sake of Russia’s greatness and the dignity of its citizens.

Thank you for your attention. (Applause.)

The National Anthem of the Russian Federation.